International Student Financial Proof and Affidavit of Support
Avila University’s
Required Financial Support Documents
Students are required by U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service to show proof to Avila University
your ability to meet educational expenses for study in the United States. You must prove that adequate
funding will be available to cover each year of study. An application for admission will not be considered
without submitting a Statement of Financial Support.
Estimate of Undergraduate Expenses for Two Semesters: 2024– 2025 Academic Year
Tuition
Summer Tuition
Room and Board
Health Insurance
Other Costs (Books, Supplies, etc)

$41,200
$3,300
$12,820
$1,970
$3,546

Total Expenses

$59,536 (student only)

Scholarship**

($25,815)

Total for Statement of Financial Support

$33,721 (student only)

*All figures are estimates and are subject to change each academic year. All International applicants
must show the total amount of $33,721 in your Statement of Financial Support. All documents must be
current and stated in U.S. Dollar amounts. Please note that fees/costs will increase for living expenses
should students decide to find residence off campus.
**Scholarship requires students to be enrolled in at least 18 hours annually.
We require these documents to verify support:
Affidavit of support
•

A separate notarized affidavit is required for each sponsor. The total funds on the affidavit(s)
must equal the total funds needed for one year of study at Avila University. Letters of sponsorship
must apply to Avila University and not be underwritten for any other college or university. The
amount must be stated in U.S. currency and must state the sponsor will provide Full financial support
for the applicant’s educational and living expenses for the entire length of study at Avila University.
If a spouse and or child is included, the Affidavit must take into consideration the amount(s) as well.
As verification that funding is available, the sponsor must attach an original bank statement for the
first year of study as evidence of the sponsor’s financial resources.

Bank statement
•
•

A bank statement must be supplied showing sufficient funds for the first year of study only.
The affidavit(s) of support and bank statement(s) that you submit must:
o be originals on bank letterhead and dated no more than twelve months prior to the start date
of the program that proves sufficient funds are available.
o include the sponsor’s name.
o be written in English; translations must be signed and sealed by the appropriate bank or
government official.
o state the amount of money in US dollars.

The sponsor(s) on the Affidavit of Financial Support and the account holder(s) on the official bank
statement(s) must be the same.
Affidavit of support from personal funds: (Financial resources in own name)
•

Proof of the applicant’s personal funds must be an official bank statement to show the entire amount
personally committed.
o Should be an official bank statement (do not submit long statements that include transaction
history)
o Showing bank/financial statements from multiple accounts is acceptable.
o Indicate the financial institution’s name (must be printed on letterhead and must be an
original copy)
o Indicate the account holder’s name.
o Clearly show the account balance
o Be dated within twelve months prior to the start date of the program.
o Be translated into English (unofficial translations are accepted)
o Clearly show the type of currency in U.S Dollars
o Funds must be enough to cover educational costs for the entire school year (will re-occur
each school year, expect annual increases)
o An additional $3,000 USD will need to be present within the statement of financial support
for each dependent that will accompany the student.

Affidavit of support from funding agency (school, government, organization)
•

School Fund Type (Scholarship or Fellowship, Athletic Contract, Department Grant, etc.)
o Copy of the offer letter signed by the sponsoring department.
o Must be printed on Official Avila University letterhead.
o Indicate the amount and length of support.
o Indicate the type of school funding, such as scholarship or fellowship, department grant, etc.

Affidavit of support from private sponsors: (family, friends)
•

Official bank statement must match the first-year expenses that the sponsor has committed on the
Affidavit of Support) The same rules apply to funds from private sponsors.
o The sponsor’s bank statement (the same rules apply to student’s personal funds)
o Letter(s) indicating the relationship between you and the sponsor(s), the amount and length of
support; letters must include sponsor’s signature.

o
o
o

Must be notarized (a notary stamp is needed to show that this is the sponsor’s original
signature)
A separate affidavit of support is required for each sponsor (the total funds must equal the
total funds needed for educational expenses for one year of study at Avila)
Each affidavit must be the original copy and have the same name on the bank statement.

On-Campus Employment:
•
•
•

F-1 non-immigrant status students are allowed to work a maximum of 20 hours per week.
Letter should be from the employer on Official letterhead, including a signature showing the amount
and length of support.
Letter should include student’s full name and Avila student ID.

Important: Unacceptable Financial Documents
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Income or salary statements
Funds that are not immediately accessible (i.e., stocks or bonds, investments, certificates)
Assets not in liquidated form (house, car, etc.)
Life insurance policy statements
Pension funds
Tax return forms or documents
Bank statements lacking currency amounts in U.S Dollars
Faxed copies or photocopies, internet banking statements
Bank letters without the name of the account holder
Letters that do not specify the amount of financial support in U.S Dollars

Disclosure: (Funds from the University)
•

Avila University cannot offer Federal Loans or other Federal Financial Assistance to International
Students.

Declaration of Sponsorship for Studies at Avila University

I, (Sponsors Name) am able and willing to provide adequate financial support for my (state relationship to
student), (student’s Name), to cover tuition, fees and living expenses in the amount of $33,721 for the
program he/she is applying for a minimum of one academic year. I guarantee that (student’s name) will
not become a public charge during his/her stay in the United States.
In signing my name to this affidavit, I swear that the information provided is an accurate statement of my
financial resources (signature of sponsor/family member). A notary stamp is needed to show that this is
the original signature of the sponsor.

