Avila University
Community Standards and Expectations Policy
Effective Date: 01/01/2025

Purpose of this Policy

Avila University approaches student behavior as an educational experience, focused on student
learning through self-reflection, personal responsibility, individual growth, and remediating harm.
The goal is to encourage students to be positive contributors to their current and future
communities.
The Community Standards and Expectations (the “CSE”) outlined in this policy articulate
prohibited behaviors and academic integrity violations because they do not align with the values
central to Avila University:
1. The worth, dignity and potential of each human being;
2. Excellence in teaching and learning;
3. Service with the dear neighbor;
4. Diversity and its expression;
5. The development of the whole person; and
6. Right relationships, with God, self, others and creation.
II.

Definitions
A. Advisor: means any person who accompanies an Alleged or Reporter for the
purpose of providing support, advice, or guidance. Any limitations on the scope
of an advisor are defined in the Accountability Procedures or other relevant
University policy. Witnesses or other Allegeds are not allowed to serve as
Advisors.
B. Alleged: means a person who is alleged to have committed behaviors that may
constitute a violation of the Community Standards and Expectations Policy.
C. Cannabis: means the parts, product, and derivatives of the plant Cannabis
sativa, indica, ruderalis, and hybrid strains, regardless of the delta-9tetrahydrocannabinol level, and is a federally controlled substance. Pursuant to
federal law, the use of cannabis, including medical use, is prohibited on
University Premises and at University Sponsored Activities. Cannabis, for the
purpose of this policy, does not include FDA approved substances or industrial
hemp as permitted by federal law.
D. Controlled Substances: includes illegal drugs (such as opiates and certain types
of stimulants), pharmaceutical drugs (such as painkillers and tranquilizers) when
used for non-medical purposes, and other substances used inappropriately (such

2

as inhalants).
E. Preponderance of the Evidence: whether it is “more likely than not” that an
allegation of a violation(s) of this policy occurred as reported.
F. Jurisdiction: means how the University can apply this Community Standards and
Expectations policy and its related Accountability Procedures. Jurisdiction covers
what conduct is reported, where the reported conduct occurred, when the
reported conduct occurred, and who allegedly committed the reported conduct. In
general, Avila University retains jurisdiction over any allegations of behaviors that
may violate this Policy committed by anyone, anywhere, at any time.
G. Reasonable Person: whether a person under similar circumstances would feel,
react, or respond in a similar manner.
H. Reporter: means a Student who is alleged to have been subjected to behavior(s)
that could constitute a violation under the Community Standards and
Expectations Policy. A Reporter may also include the person reporting the
alleged behavior(s), even if that person is not alleged to be the subject of the
alleged behavior(s).
I.

Student: means any person registered or enrolled in a University academic
course or program, and any person admitted to the University for any purpose
related to the person’s registration or enrollment, or any person who participates
in University programs that require Student status. Student includes any person
who was a student in the previous term and is eligible for registration.

J. Student Organization: means any group of Avila University Students meeting the
University’s criteria for organizational recognition or registration established by
the University or its units, colleges, or departments. Jurisdiction is retained for
behavior that occurred when the Student Organization was recognized or
registered, regardless of current status.
K. University Official: means a person having assigned University responsibilities
who is performing their University duties. This includes Students who have been
authorized to act on behalf of the University, such as resident assistants.
L. University Premises: includes all land, buildings, or grounds owned, leased,
operated, controlled, or supervised by the University and adjacent sidewalks and
streets.
M. University Sponsored Activity: means any activity that is directly initiated or
supervised by the University or a Student Organization, on or off University
Premises.

3

III.

Application and Jurisdiction of the Community Standards and Expectations

The Dean of Students, or their designee (the “Dean”), develops procedures for the
administration of the CSE, as well as its applicable Accountability Procedures. Behavior that
may constitute a violation of the CSE may be reported to the Dean at any time, whether or not
the Alleged is currently enrolled or registered. The Dean has the authority to determine whether
or not the allegation merits further response.
Attendance at a private educational institution is not compulsory and this policy is not a contract,
express or implied, between any applicant, student, staff or faculty member. Students, Student
Organizations, and Guests/Visitors are expected to abide by all Community Standards
articulated in this policy. It is every Student’s responsibility to be familiar with all policies and
procedures published by the University. Ignorance of a published policy will not exempt a
Student or Student Organization from accountability that results from violating the CSE.
The CSE applies to each Student for behavior that occurs from the time of admission,
registration, or enrollment (whichever occurs first) through the actual awarding of a degree or
complete withdrawal as defined by the University, regardless of when the behavior is reported.
1. It applies to behavior that occurs during periods of suspension from the
University.
2. It applies even if the Alleged subsequently withdraws from the University.
3. It applies to behavior that occurs between periods of enrollment unless the
Alleged completely withdraws before the deadline to register for the next term.
For Students enrolled in the spring semester, jurisdiction is maintained until the
deadline to register for the fall semester.
The CSE applies to all activities on University Premises and during any University Sponsored
Activity regardless of the on- or off-campus location. The CSE also applies to Student and
Student Organization behavior that occurs off-campus and that may be unconnected to a school
activity, especially if that behavior adversely impacts the University community or its objectives
and mission.
The University’s resolution process outlined in the CSE and its applicable Accountability
Procedures are designed with an educational purpose and guiding principles. Proceedings
under the CSE and its Accountability Proceedings are separate from civil or criminal
proceedings and may, at the discretion of the Dean, be carried out prior to, simultaneously with,
or following civil or criminal proceedings. The University uses the “preponderance of the
evidence” standard to determine if a reported behavior is in violation of the CSE.
A Student requesting an accommodation must follow the appropriate process for requesting an
accommodation through the Student Access Office. The Dean will work in collaboration with the
Student Access Office to determine the appropriate accommodation. The Dean will notify the

4

Student of the appropriate accommodation and how it applies to the Community Standards and
Expectations Accountability Procedures.
IV.

Freedom of Speech and Academic Freedom

The University is committed to an objective search for truth. A healthy dialogue among the
campus community is fostered as varying viewpoints and ideas are freely presented. The
University is an institution whose members may express themselves, while protecting and
respecting the rights of others to learn, to conduct research, and to carry out the essential
functions of the University free from interference or obstruction. When addressing allegations of
violations of this Policy, the University will take all permissible actions to respond appropriately
while respecting the rights of free expression and academic freedom.
V.

Amnesty Policy

At times, students may be hesitant to report the occurrence of Community Standards and
Expectations violations to University officials because they are concerned that they themselves,
or a witness to the reported behaviors, may be found responsible for other policy violations,
such as alcohol or drug violations.
Although violations of University policy are not condoned, the importance of addressing the
reported behaviors takes priority. Therefore, the University will not refer an individual, witness,
or Student Organization who reports an alleged policy violation to the Community Standards
and Expectations process as an Alleged party for any other violations that may have occurred in
connection with the reported behaviors.
VI.

Policy Violations
1. Academic Integrity Violations
a. Cheating: Accessing or using unauthorized materials, information, tools,
or study aids.
b. Fabrication: Providing false information in fulfillment of an academic
assignment, exercise, or other requirement, including making up data,
sources, efforts, events, or results and recording, reporting, or using them
as authentic.
c. Multiple Submissions of Work: Using or submitting the same or
substantially the same academic work for credit more than once, unless
specifically authorized by the instructor of record for the course in which
it’s being submitted for credit. If authorized, appropriate disclosure and
citation is required.

5

d. Plagiarism: Presenting another’s material as one’s own, including using
another’s words, results, processes or ideas, in whole or in part, without
giving appropriate credit. Plagiarism is contingent on the content of the
submitted work product, regardless of whether the unattributed material
was included intentionally or unintentionally. The use of material taken
from any source—whether directly quoted, paraphrased, or otherwise
adapted—must be attributed to that source. Plagiarism also includes the
submission of material generated by others. This may include artificial
intelligence (AI) content generators and generative AI tools such as
ChatGPT; websites with a question-and-answer feature such as Course
Hero, Chegg, and Bing; assistance from tutors or online language
translators that results in unoriginal work; and work that is purchased or
otherwise prepared by another individual.
e. Unauthorized Collaboration: Working with others in the submission of an
assignment, exercise, or other academic requirement for assessment
when not expressly permitted by the instructor. This section is not
intended to prohibit the type of collaboration that promotes productive
discourse and learning between students, such as engaging with lecture
materials or course texts; discussing subject matter concepts, ideas, and
themes; talking through problem-solving strategies and approaches; or
study groups working to prepare for an exam. Unless expressly prohibited
by the instructor, such collaboration is encouraged to the extent that
students remain able to submit work for assessment which reflects their
own individual interpretations, analysis, and conclusions. This level of
collaboration will not constitute a violation of this policy, unless expressly
prohibited by the instructor.
f.

Unauthorized Recording or Use: Recording and/or dissemination of
instructional content, or other intellectual property, without the express
written permission of the instructor(s) or intellectual property owner.

2. General Policy Violations
a. Alcohol:
i.

Possession or consumption of alcohol by those under the legal
drinking age.

ii.

Furnishing of alcohol to a person under the legal drinking age.

iii.

Possession or consumption of alcohol by a person of the legal
drinking age in unauthorized areas or furnishing of an alcoholic
beverage to any person in unauthorized areas.

6

iv.

Causing another to ingest alcohol without consent.

v.

Attending classes, events, or participating in any college activities
while under the influence of alcohol.

b. Attempts, threats, or inciting others: Attempting to, threatening to, or
inciting others to engage in any of the conduct prohibited by this Policy.
c. Cannabis:
i.

Use, possession, or procurement of cannabis except as expressly
permitted by both State and Federal law.

ii.

Furnishing, cultivation, manufacturing, distributing, or selling
cannabis except as expressly permitted by both State and Federal
law.

iii.

Causing another to ingest cannabis without consent.

d. Controlled Substances
i.

Use, possession, or procurement of a Controlled Substance
except as expressly permitted by both State and Federal law.

ii.

Furnishing, cultivation, manufacturing, distributing, or selling of a
Controlled Substance, except as expressly permitted by both
State and Federal law.

iii.

Causing another to ingest a controlled substance without consent.

e. Damage/Destruction of Property: Actions that damage or tend to damage
public property or private property not one’s own.
f.

Disruptive Behavior: Engages in conduct that:
i.

Creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition;

ii.

Causes a reasonable person to fear for their safety or the safety of
another;

iii.

Disrupts or tends to disrupt teaching, research, administration,
disciplinary proceedings, or other University activities on- or offUniversity premises.

7

g. Failure to comply: Failure to comply with any reasonable directive of
University or public officials in the performance of their duties. This
includes but is not limited to, failures to: adhere to no-contact-directives,
remove oneself from University Premises, complete conduct outcomes
and/or sanctions, and cease and desist.
h. Falsification: Knowingly providing/presenting, creating, or possessing
falsified or forged materials, records, or documents. Additionally,
intentionally initiating any false report or providing false or misleading
information to a person acting in their capacity as a University or public
official.
i.

Gambling: An action in violation of state or federal law that involves
staking or risking something of value on the outcome of a contest of
chance, a future event not under a person’s control, or an agreement to
receive something of value in the event of a certain outcome.

j.

Harassment: Engaging in behavior that is sufficiently severe, pervasive,
and objectively offensive to a degree that it interferes with a reasonable
person’s ability to work, learn, live, or participate in or benefit from the
services, activities, or privileges provided by the University.

k. Hazing: Intentionally subjecting another to a situation or action that a
reasonable person would foresee as causing mental or physical
discomfort, embarrassment, injury, or ridicule. Hazing also includes
asserting power or dominance over another person as a condition for
selection or continuation in an organization. Individual acceptance of or
submission to any activity does not affect a determination of whether the
activity constitutes hazing. This includes compelled participation in
behavior which would violate the law and/or University Policy.
l.

Misuse of computing resources: Violations of the University’s Information
Technology Policy as reflected in the Student Handbook. These violations
include:
i.

Actions taken to deliberately deny authorized persons access to
any aspect of the information technology system;

ii.

Actions taken that interfere with or alter the integrity of the
University’s equipment or software;

iii.

Actions taken that place on any University equipment icons,
screensavers, or items of an offensive nature;

8

iv.

Unauthorized access to another person’s email, use of another
person’s email, and/or use of another person’s password to
access a person’s email.

v.

Prohibited storage or display of fraudulent, harassing, nuisance,
threatening, offensive, and/or obscene messages/materials when
using University equipment or technology, or displayed with
private equipment in any public forum.

m. Physical contact: Physical contact that endangers or harms the health or
safety of any person.
n. Retaliation: intimidation, threats, coercion, or discrimination against any
person by the University, a student, or an employee or other person
authorized by the University to provide aid, benefit, or service under the
University’s education program or activity, for the purpose of interfering
with any right or privilege secured by this Policy, or because the person
has reported information, made a complaint, testified, assisted, or
participated or refused to participate in any manner in an investigation,
proceeding, or hearing under the this Policy.
o. Safety hazard: Tampering with firefighting equipment or smoke detectors,
causing a false alarm, or endangering the health or safety of others.
p. Sales and Solicitation: No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the
business of selling or advertising services, activities, goods, take orders
or make contracts for purchase or delivery, sell or offer for sale tickets,
goods, activities or services, solicit funds, subscriptions, or orders for any
purpose within the boundaries of Avila University without the written
consent of the Dean of Students or their designee.
Recognized campus organizations and individual students may request
permission from the Dean of Students or their designee to allow for the
sale of goods and services or solicitation of funds. Permission may be
granted provided that advertising and activities are planned and approved
in advance, and that the financial arrangements have been made and
coordinated in the Student Life office
q. Smoking and tobacco use:
i.

Smoking and tobacco use, including, but not limited to, “vaping”,
chewing tobacco, and hookah, are prohibited on University owned
or controlled property, including within a vehicle parked on
University owned or controlled property.

9

ii.

r.

Possession of tobacco products and inhalant delivery systems (“ecigarettes”) by those under 21 years of age on University
Premises or at a University Sponsored Activity, is prohibited in
accordance with state law. This does not prohibit the use or
possession of products that have been approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco
cessation product, provided the product is marketed, sold, and
used solely for the approved purpose.

Theft: Unauthorized taking or possession of property of another, including
goods, services, and other valuables.

s. Threatening Behavior: any physical, written, or verbal conduct, whether
direct, indirect or conditional, that conveys intent or is reasonably
perceived to convey intent to cause physical harm to property or
someone or to place someone in fear of his or her safety or the safety of
others. Threatening Behavior encompasses the use of technology to
commit this behavior.
t.

Unauthorized access or use: Unauthorized access to, entry to, or use of
physical or virtual space, including misuse of access privileges.
Unauthorized use of University property or services, or the property of
others. This includes, but is not limited to, conduct which violates the
Posting Policy and Facilities and Services provisions in the Student
Handbook.

u. Unwanted contact: Repeated contact or communication to another person
when the contacting person knows or should know that the contact or
communication is unwanted by the other person and:
i.

The contact would cause a reasonable person fear of physical
harm; or

ii.

The contacting person knows or should know that the contact or
communication significantly impacts the other person’s ability to
perform the activities of daily life.

v. Violation of law: Any action or behavior that violates federal, state, or local
law.
w. Violation of University Policy: Any action or behavior by a Student that
violates the Community Standards and Expectations policy, any other
University Policy, or which is inconsistent with the mission statement of
the University.

10

x. Weapons:
i.

Possession of explosive materials, fireworks, firearms,
ammunition or other dangerous weapons is prohibited on
University Premises and at University Sponsored Activities, unless
expressly authorized by law and applicable University Policy.

ii.

Use of explosive materials, fireworks, firearms, ammunition, other
dangerous weapons, or any object or substance used as a
weapon is prohibited on University Premises and at University
Sponsored Activities, unless expressly authorized by law and
applicable University Policy.

iii.

Weapons, possessed, used, or handled off-campus in a manner
that is unlawful or contributes to any other violation of this policy is
also prohibited.

iv.

Any item resembling a weapon including, but not limited to, Nerf
guns, pellet guns, water guns, and toy swords, arrows, or other
weapons, are strictly prohibited.

3. Prohibited Discrimination and Retaliation Policy; Title IX Policy
The University maintains separate policies and procedures for Title IX offenses
and their related non-Title IX conduct. These policies are linked in the “Related
Policies” section below.
VII.

The Alleged’s Rights

When a person is accused of committing behaviors that may constitute a violation of the CSE,
that person becomes an Alleged under the CSE and its Accountability Procedures. Accordingly,
Allegeds retain the following rights under the CSE and the Accountability Procedures:
1. Receive a written Notice of Potential Policy Violations that includes, but is not
limited to, whether the Alleged is facing removal as a potential Administrative
Outcome.
2. Be informed of the Accountability Procedures.
3. Be presumed not responsible until a finding of responsibility is made by the Case
Manager, or until the Alleged makes an admission of responsibility.
4. Remain silent during all phases of the Accountability Procedures without
negative inference that this silence translates to responsibility, with the
understanding that answering some investigative questions not others may

11

reflect negatively on the Alleged’s credibility.
5. Present evidence and witnesses relevant to the allegations.
6. Review all evidence received by the Case Manager that may be relied upon in
decision making, subject to limitations from policies, regulations, and State and
Federal law. What documentation is available, and how it may be accessed, is
defined in the Accountability Procedures.
7. Be assisted by an Advisor of their choosing in accordance with the limitations
articulated in the Accountability Procedures.
8. Decline to appear at the Accountability Meeting with the understanding that the
Case Manager may adjudicate the case in the Alleged’s absence and without the
Alleged’s input.
9. Receive a written Decision Letter that includes the Case Manager’s decision, the
rationale for how the Case Manager reached that decision, and any assigned
Outcomes.
10. Request an appeal in accordance with the Appeal Procedures.
This policy does not modify or detract from any rights otherwise afforded under Federal or State
law.
VIII.

The Accountability Procedures for General Policy Violation Allegations

The steps for resolving allegations of behavior(s) that may constitute General Policy Violations
are outlined in Section III of the Accountability Procedures. The following is a non-exhaustive
summary of the General Policy Violation Allegation Procedures:
1. The Dean reviews the initial report of alleged behaviors and determines whether
the report should proceed through the Accountability Procedures.
2. If the Dean determines a case should proceed to the Accountability Procedures,
the Dean will assign a Case Manager to the case. In resolving the case, the
Case Manager will serve as the investigator and decision-maker.
3. The Case Manager issues a Notice of Potential Policy Violation to the Alleged.
4. The Alleged may opt into an Informational Meeting, or proceed directly to the
Accountability Meeting.
5. At the Accountability Meeting, the Alleged may propose witnesses and evidence
in connection with the alleged violations. The Case Manager will also ask the

12

Alleged various investigative questions during the Accountability Meeting.
6. The Case Manager will contact witnesses and review all evidence provided by
the Alleged, as well as review all evidence submitted as part of the investigation
of the alleged violations.
7. The Case Manager will, based on the preponderance of the evidence, make a
finding of responsibility or non-responsibility, then communicate this finding and
rationale to the Alleged in an Outcome Letter.
8. The Outcome Letter includes the finding made by the Case Manager, the
rationale for how the Case Manager reached that decision, and, if applicable, the
Outcomes assigned to the Alleged.
9. The Alleged and/or Reporter may appeal the Case Manager’s decision based on
the outlined Appeal Standards listed in the Appeals Procedure, Section V of the
Accountability Procedures.
IX.

Appeal Procedures

The Appeals Procedures are outlined in Section V of the Accountability Procedures. In
summary, the Appeals Procedures consist of the following steps:
1. The Appealing Party submits an Appeal Request Submission Form to the Dean.
2. The Appeal Request must identify and support at least one of the listed bases of
appeal in Section V(B) of the Accountability Procedures.
3. The Dean, serving as the Appeal Facilitator, will conduct a preliminary review of
the Appeal Request to determine if it meets and supports at least one basis for
appeal.
4. The Appeal Facilitator will establish a three-person Appeals Board. The three (3)
people will include the Appeal Facilitator, and two (2) other Faculty or Staff
Members.
5. The Appeals Board will receive a copy of the Appeal Record for review and will
meet for a scheduled Appeals Board Proceeding.
6. At the conclusion of the Appeals Board Proceeding, the Appeals Board will issue
their final decision in accordance with their authority under the Appeal
Procedures.

13

7. The Appeal Facilitator will communicate the Appeals Board’s decision to the
appropriate parties through the Appeals Outcome Letter.
8. The Appeals Board’s decision is final and is not appealable under any other
University policy.
X.

Potential Outcomes

In the Outcome Letter, the Case Manager will outline the Outcomes assigned in the event of a
responsible finding. Since no two incidents are the same, the Case Manager will use their
discretion in issuing appropriate Outcomes that best fit the behaviors and circumstances
involved.
Outcomes typically include two categories: Administrative and Educational. Administrative
Outcomes address the status of the Alleged and include, but are not limited to, loss of
privileges, warnings, probation, and removals from the University. Educational Outcomes
provide opportunities for the Alleged to learn from the behaviors and circumstances surrounding
a case. Educational Outcomes include, but are not limited to, reflection essays, informative
conversations, and on-demand educational programming. Allegeds should expect to see at
least one Administrative Outcome and one Education Outcome in their Outcome Letter.
XI.

Informal Resolution Options

Upon reviewing the initial report, the Dean will determine if offering an Informal Resolution
Option is appropriate. The Dean will communicate the Informal Resolution Options to the
Alleged in the Notice of Potential Policy Violations if the Dean confirms this is an appropriate
resolution option based on the reported behaviors in the initial report.
Informal Resolution Options include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Resolution Agreement: Allegeds who wish to accept responsibility for the
reported behaviors listed in the Notice of Potential Policy Violations may do so
through a Resolution Agreement. The Resolution Agreement will include the list
of the potential violations of the Community Standards and Expectations Policy
and the assigned Outcomes if the Alleged accepts responsibility. The Resolution
Agreement may include other provisions including, but not limited to, waiver of
other procedural rights within the Accountability Procedures.
2. Expectations Conversation: In certain instances, the Dean may offer the Alleged
an Expectations Conversation instead of proceeding through the Expectations
Procedures. An Expectations Conversation may include, but is not limited to,
conversations with the Dean, other campus administrators, or faculty members.
The Dean will decide the appropriate context of an Expectations Conversation
and will communicate all details to the Alleged. Failure to attend a required
Expectations Conversation may lead to a referral to the Accountability

14

Procedures.
XII.

Interim Action

If reported allegations of potential CSE violations present an immediate and substantial threat to
the health or safety of any person, the Dean, in consultation with other qualified campus
officials, will determine whether interim action is necessary. This determination is made on a
case-by-case basis through an individual and objective assessment of the parties’ needs and of
the Alleged’s involvement in the reported allegations. Additionally, an interim action may be
placed or rescinded at any time during the Accountability Procedural process.
If an interim action is taken, the following will occur:
1. The Alleged will receive a written Notice of the Interim Action (which may occur
simultaneously with the implementation of the interim action). During the
Accountability Meeting, the Alleged may ask questions and agree to the interim
action or request that the interim action be amended or rescinded.
2. Within five (5) business days of the meeting, the Alleged will receive an interim
action decision from the Dean.
XIII.

Record Retention

Disciplinary action records will be maintained for a minimum of seven (7) years in accordance
with State of Missouri records policies and in compliance with federal legislation such as
FERPA, the Clery Act, and Title IX.
XIV.

Related Policies
1. Community Standards and Expectations Accountability Procedures
2. Housing Handbook
3. Title IX Policy and Procedures
4. Prohibited Discrimination and Harassment Policy and Procedures

15

