STUDENT HANDBOOK 2022‐2023


I. WELCOME
Dear Avila Student,
As a member of the Avila University community, you are a part of something greater than your individual talents and
goals. You are now a part of a caring community dedicated to meeting the needs of the “dear neighbor” in the tradition
of the Sisters of St. Joseph of Carondelet.
Every member of the Avila family, students, staff, and faculty is charged with living by the values of our community
both on and off campus. Whether you are a new or returning member of our community, we encourage you to take
the time to absorb the history, heritage and values that make Avila University such a special place.
These three cornerstones (history, heritage and values), together with the dedicated students, staff and faculty, are at
the core of everything we do. As we embark upon a new academic year filled with promise and hope, we recommit
ourselves to the pursuit of excellence that permeates this campus. This pursuit, while challenging at times, has been
shaped by our founders and has inspired the lives of our graduates. I encourage you to explore all the ways that Avila
and our surrounding Kansas City community can help you achieve excellence…in the classroom, in the residence halls,
in co‐curricular activities, and in the community.
Embrace the new perspectives that undoubtedly will come as part of your college experience.
Have fun as you pursue your degree and know that we are dedicated to supporting you in your personal growth and
development. Don’t hesitate to visit with us about how we can make the
Avila experience better for all those involved.
Here is to a wonderful academic year!
This handbook provides a resource and guide that will help you in your educational journey. It states proudly and boldly
the rights and expectations of the members of our community. One of the first responsibilities of any Avila student is to
read this handbook and to understand your responsibilities under the Student Code of Conduct section as well as the
University Policies section.
There are some occasions during the course of an academic year when there are modifications to the policies
contained within; normally these are distributed after approval through the appropriate channels, many of which
involve student input. All academic policies are contained in the Avila University Online Catalog, of which you need to
be familiar with as well. If you have any questions concerning the Student Handbook, please contact the assistant vice
president of student development and success—your input is welcome.

MISSION STATEMENT
Avila University, a Catholic university founded and inspired by the Sisters of St. Joseph of Carondelet, provides
undergraduate and graduate education in the liberal arts and professional studies, preparing lifelong learners who
make meaningful contributions to the global community.
(Adopted 1986; reviewed 1995; revised 2005; revised 2017)

5

COMMUNITY VALUES
Guided by our Catholic identity as expressed through the heritage and vision of the Sisters of St. Joseph, the Avila
community values…
∙ Excellence in teaching and learning
∙ The worth, dignity, and potential of each human being
∙ Diversity and its expression
∙ The development of the whole person
∙ Right relationships, with God, self, others, and creation
∙ Service with the dear neighbor
(adopted 1986; reviewed 1995; revised 2005; revised 2016)

PRAYER OF
ST. TERESA OF AVILA
Let nothing disturb you.
Let nothing frighten you.
All things are passing.
God only is changeless.
Patience gains all things.
Who has God wants nothing.
God alone suffices.

HISTORY
The Sisters of St. Joseph were founded in LePuy, France in 1650 to serve their neighbors by responding to the needs of
society.
In 1836, six Sisters arrived in America and traveled up the Mississippi river to St. Louis, Missouri and settled in a small
town south of the city known as Carondelet. These women established several schools and were soon known as the
Sisters of St. Joseph of Carondelet.
In 1866, five Sisters came to Kansas City and opened the first private high school for young women, St.
Teresa’s Academy. In 1916, the academy administration chartered the first private college for women in
Kansas City, the St. Teresa College, and offered a two‐year program leading to an Associate of Arts Degree.
Fifteen years later, St. Joseph’s Hospital School of Nursing became affiliated with the College and nursing students were
enrolled in basic science and humanities courses. In 1940, the College was expanded to a four‐year liberal arts college
with professional programs in nursing, education and business. It was fully accredited by the Commission on
Institutions of Higher Education of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools in 1946 and was called the
College of St. Teresa.

6

The College established Kansas City’s first baccalaureate degree program in nursing in 1948 and was accredited by the
National League for Nursing in 1966. Additional programs in allied health, social work and special education were
developed to complement strong programs in the liberal arts.
The growth of the College resulted in a move to its present campus in 1963, which is located in suburban south
Kansas City, three miles from Interstate 435. Seeking to serve a diverse population, the College became co‐educational
in 1969, established graduate programs in business, education and psychology in 1978, and began Kansas City’s first
weekend College in 1984. Due to its continued growth as a comprehensive institution of higher learning during the
1990s, offering undergraduate, graduate and professional programs, Avila became, in 2002, Avila University.
Since its founding 1916, Avila University has been committed to excellence in teaching and learning in an environment
that respects the uniqueness of each person and stresses responsible service to others.

ACCREDITATION
Avila University is accredited by:
The Higher Learning Commission of the North Central Association
30 North LaSalle St., Suite 2400
Chicago, Illinois 60602‐2504
800.621.7440 • Fax 312.263.7462
Internet: info@ncacihe.org
Please refer to the Avila University Online Catalog for information on specific program accreditation.
AVILA UNIVERSITY CURRICULUM
AND UNIVERSITY‐WIDE EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES
Please refer to the Avila University Online Catalog for a complete listing of the Avila curriculum, University‐wide
educational outcomes, programs and courses of instruction.

II. CAMPUS RESOURCES
**Hours and services may vary due to campus events.

ACADEMIC AFFAIRS OFFICE
Blasco Hall , Upper Level
Office Hours: Monday – Friday ► 8 am – 5 pm

Ext. 3758 /3759

The offices of academic affairs are located in this area. Information concerning Commencement, the Honors and
Recognition Ceremony, grade appeal procedures, and credit for prior learning procedures can be obtained in the Office
of Academic Affairs. The office also works with students on academic probation, written requests received for late
withdrawals from classes, and/or refunds of tuition for extraordinary circumstances.

7

ALUMNI ASSOCIATION
alumni@avila.edu
Blasco Hall, Lower Level
Office Hours: Monday – Friday ► 8 am – 5 pm

Ext. 3780

Ever since the first student graduated from St. Teresa’s College in 1918, the Avila University Alumni
Association has been working hard to keep our alumni connected to their alma mater. Through numerous events, the
Alumni Association continues to welcome our alumni to reconnect with former classmates, meet new alumni friends,
and stay in touch with the University.

ATHLETIC DEPARTMENT
Mabee Fieldhouse
Ext. 3653
Office Hours: Monday – Friday ► 8 am – 4:30 pm
Fieldhouse Hours: Monday – Thursday ►8 am –9 pm; Friday ►8 am – 5 pm; Saturday & Sunday ► Closed
Mabee Fieldhouse hours of operation are subject to availability as the athletic department and teams have priority over
the facility at all times. All holidays recognized by the University are observed.
The athletic department is responsible for the development and administration of an intercollegiate sports program
that provides quality and competitive opportunities for students in a variety of fields.
The director of athletics, in conjunction with coaches and staff, coordinates recruitment of student athletes, promotion
of athletic programs, and management of all athletic facilities and equipment including Mabee Fieldhouse, the Pavilion
and the Zarda Sports Complex.
The Eagles are members of, and compete at the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics
(NAIA) level and have a conference affiliation with the Kansas Collegiate Athletic Conference.
Avila students, faculty and staff receive free admission to all home athletic contests with a valid Avila ID. For more
information about Avila’s Athletic Programs and current game schedules, check the website at Avila ‐ Eagles Athletics

BOOKSTORE
Bookstore@avila.edu
Marian Center, Lower Level
Hours: Monday – Friday ► 8:00 am – 4:00 pm; Saturday & Sunday ►Closed

Ext. 3630

The campus bookstore and mailroom offers US postage Stamps, shipping supplies, school and office supplies, soda pop,
candy, logo clothing, and miscellaneous gifts. Cash, checks, Visa, MasterCard, and Discover are accepted. For more
information, please call 816.501.3630, or visit the Avila website. USPS, UPS, and FED X drop off point also.

BUSINESS OFFICE
BusinessOffice@avila.edu
Blasco, Lower Level
Hours

Ext. 3700
► Monday – Friday 8:00 am – 5:00 pm
► Saturday & Sunday Closed

8

 https://www.avila.edu/avila‐life/center‐for‐student‐excellence/student‐financial‐
services/tuition/

The Business Office at Avila is responsible for the billing and processing of tuition and fee payments, collection services
on past due accounts, third‐party billings, and the disbursement of excess financial aid and all other refunds.
You can use your financial aid to pay standard charges such as tuition, room and board, course fees, university fees, etc.
However, per federal regulations, Avila University cannot apply your financial aid toward penalty fees such as late
payment fees, late enrollment fees, returned check fees, and finance charges.

CAMPUS SAFETY
CampusSafety@Avila.edu
Whitfield Center, Next to Subway

Ext. 2466

Campus Safety Officers can be reached immediately at 816.985.6079.
If the situation requires immediate emergency response from local authorities, call 911 (campus phones – dial 9.911).
Campus safety is available for safety escorts on campus, completing incident reports, emergency response planning,
crime statistics, and safety education. All campus crimes or incidents must be reported to Campus Safety.
To view the campus crime report go to http://www.avila.edu/campuslife/crimestats.asp

CAREER SERVICES
careers@avila.edu
Slepitza Center for Student Excellence, Hodes 118
Office Hours: Monday – Friday ► 8 am – 5 pm

Ext. 2901

Career Services offers a variety of resources and programs to assist students and alumni with career planning and job
search needs. Services available include:
● Handshake [ https://avila.joinhandshake.com/] an online job board where someone can receive personalized
recommendations for jobs, internships, events and resources based on career interests, major, experience, and job
search history.
● Prepara on and assistance with résumés, cover le ers, digital portfolios, job search, and interview skills
● Opportuni es with career focused events, workshops, and networking
● Partnerships with alumni, mentors, career fairs, and recruitment
● Career coaching to assist with major and career decision‐making.
● Other resources may include:
o Career Assessments and Interpretations
o Job Offer/Salary Negotiation
o Graduate or Professional School Exploration
Assistance is provided through scheduled appointments, walk‐ins, and email. Appointments outside normal office
hours are available by special appointment.

Community Service/Dear Neighbors in Action (DNA)
9

At Avila Community service is who we are. The Avila Service Organization is called Dear Neighbors in Action, and all are
invited to be a part of this organization.
Contact David.armstrong@avila.edu if you want to help those in need.
DNA conducts weekly opportunities for service and does a weekend outreach at least once per month.
Organizations Served:
We partner with more than 30 agencies in the KC region to assist with everything from home repair, community
gardens and feeding the hungry.

Service Trips:
● Service Immersion Trip Opportunities: Groups are sent to these service sites; Kansas City, MO;
Okolona, MS; Salem, WV; Hinton, WV; and Guatemala. We believe it is important to serve, work and learn locally,
nationally and globally. It is important to contact us early if you would like to learn more about how you can be
involved in these important opportunities.
Dear Neighbors in Action: To learn more contact David.armstrong@avila.edu. Information can be found on the web at
https://www.avila.edu/avila‐life/campus‐ministry/service/

COUNSELING SERVICES
counseling@avila.edu
Slepitza Center for Student Excellence, Hodes 121
Office Hours: Monday – Friday ► 8:00 am – 5:00 pm

Ext. 3767

Counseling Services provides free and confidential counseling to all Avila students. Counseling services can help
students with any personal problems or mental health concerns including:
 Depression
 Anxiety
 Stress
 Academic Concerns
 Adjusting to College
 Relationships
 Self‐Esteem
The counselor can also assist in providing students with on‐campus and off‐campus resources and referrals.
Appointments can be made by stopping by the office, phone call, or email.

FINANCIAL AID OFFICE
finaid@avila.edu
Blasco
Office Hours

Ext. 3600
► Lower Level
► Mon – Fri ► 8 am – 5 pm

Our Financial Aid staff is dedicated to assisting students in the pursuit of higher education. Approximately 93% of the
students at Avila University receive some form of financial aid, such as scholarships, grants, loans, and the campus work
program. For more information on financial aid options and policies, please visit www.avila.edu/finaid or review the
Academic Catalog. If you have any questions on how to apply for these resources, please contact the Financial Aid
office.

10

FEED YOUR FRIENDS FOOD PANTRY
feedyourfriends@avila.edu
Dallavis
Office Hours

► Room 812B
► Mon – Thurs ► 12:00 pm – 6:00 pm
► Fri ► 9:00 am – Noon
► Weekends by appointment via email

In the spirit of “Helping with the Dear Neighbor” the Feed Your Friends pantry fights food insecurity among members of
the Avila community by providing free food and supplemental resources to all current Avila students, staff, and faculty
members.

FOOD SERVICE
Nancy.White2@avila.edu
Marian Center Upper Level
Dining Hall Hours

► Dining Hall
Ext. 3755
► Mon – Thurs ► 7:15 am – 7 pm
► Fri ► 7:15 am – 6:30 pm
► Sat & Sun ► 10:30am – 6pm
Dining hall hours are subject to change and are always posted outside of the dining hall main entrance.

The University, through a private contractor, provides a variety of food service programs and services for the campus.
The primary food service facility on campus is the dining hall located in Marian Centre. All resident students must
select a meal plan option. Resident students have the choice of three meal plan options.
Food service offers commuter students, faculty and staff the option of a punch‐card meal plan and information is
available through the food service office. Catering available upon request. Please contact the director of food service
for further information.

HUMAN RESOURCES
Jody.Mitchell@avila.edu
Payroll Office Ext. 3690
Carondelet Hall
Office Hours
► Mon – Fri ► 8 am – 5 pm

Ext. 3618

Student Payroll: Federal work program students are paid once a month; see the pay schedule in the student financial
services office. To be paid, all students must have current federal and state W‐4 and I‐9 forms on file with the Office of
Human Resources.
To obtain checks, students must present valid Avila ID or driver’s license to Student Financial Services.

IDENTIFICATION CARD (ID)
Whitfield Center
ID Service

► Campus Safety Office ► Next to Subway
► M‐F 8:30 – 11:30a & 1:00 – 4:00p

Ext. 2950

All students are required to have an official, Avila University ID card. Students shall present their ID card upon request
of an authorized official for services, admittance to activities, events, and the use of some facilities. ID cards are
required for students on meal plans to access food service and for resident students to gain access to the residence

11

halls. Resident students must have a valid ID at all times. Replacement ID cards are available at a cost of $20, due at the
time of card replacement. For more information, contact the campus safety office.

LIBRARY, HOOLEY‐BUNDSCHU LEARNING COMMONS
hooleybundschulib@gmail.com
Second Floor, Whitfield Center
►Monday – Thursday ►7:30 am – 11 pm
►Friday ►7:30 am – 5 pm
►Saturday ►1pm – 5 pm
► Sunday ►1 pm – 11 pm

Ext. 3621

Hooley‐Bundschu Library Learning Commons (1978) The Hooley‐Bundschu Library Learning Commons, renovated in
the summer of 2014, is the information resource center for the campus (http://www.avila.edu/hbl/library/index.aspx
l). The Learning Commons offers a full‐service learning, research and project space. Online and in‐person appointments
available through Navigate for research assistance.
The Library Learning Commons includes
Circulation Desk‐ Here you can request a laptop computer for hourly or daily checkout. Headphones can be checked
out to listen to music while you write a paper. Camcorders can be checked out for 24 hours so you can record your
presentation. Make a reservation for a group study room, or the presentation space.. Request dry erase markers
for writable surfaces. Get help with research.
IT Help Desk: Get help downloading Office 365 to your laptop, reset your password, get your email on your
smartphone, or get help with any network problems you may be having. The IT Help Desk will be staffed during posted
hours.
The Library Learning Commons includes:
o multiple PC computers and Mac’s
o over 50 laptop computers
o A printer for papers, articles and presentations
o six study rooms, two larger spaces with monitors and wireless access for students to share work
o ability to make video presentations
o wireless printing from your laptop
The Library Learning Commons offers staff assistance to meet student’s information and academic needs and is
designed to provide an environment conducive to learning and research in an age that merges written and electronic
media. The Library Learning Commons is a member of MOBIUS, a consortium of over 60 academic libraries with a
shared on‐line catalog of over 27 million items, providing access to holdings statewide and delivered by courier 5 days a
week.
The Library also provides access to 30 full‐text databases like JSTOR Humanities, EBSCO’s Acdemic Search Premier,
Psychology Journals, CINHAL full text, Business Source Premier and more. The Library Learning Commons also
provides a designated QUIET STUDY AREA, a collection of over 45,000 print books and 120,000 ebooks, a current
subscription list of 184 periodicals and newspapers, and DVDs to support the curriculum. The Laura Sloan Children’s
Literature Collection, Curriculum Collection, Play Scripts, Reference, and Current Periodicals are also housed in the
Learning Commons.
Study Rooms

12

The study rooms can be reserved for groups of three or more. Computers connect using the app to displaying work,
and allow you to work collaboratively. Room Reservation can be made at the Circulation Desk or by calling 816‐501‐
3621.
The Learning Commons also offers a Recreational DVD Collection for student use, and includes titles requested by
student for students. The Avila University Circulating Collection of books is housed in compact shelving in O’Rielly Hall
and available on request.
Tutoring Space
There is a dedicated space for tutoring services. Hours of availability are posted at the Circulation Desk.
Services available include:
o Writing Center— one‐on‐one help with any writing project from experienced peer tutors, graduate students, and
professional staff. Online and in‐person appointments available through Navigate. Walk‐in hours can be found at
www.avila.edu/writingcenter.
o Tutoring‐ individual and group tutoring in all subject areas as well as support for required study halls. Online and in‐
person appointments available through Navigate. Walk‐in hours and study jam schedule can be found at
www.avila.edu/avila‐life/center‐for‐student‐excellence/tutoring‐services.

LOST AND FOUND
Whitfield Center

► Campus Safety Office ► Next to Subway

Ext. 2950

Books and personal property found on campus are held in the campus safety office. To turn in or recover lost articles,
contact the campus safety office at 816.501.2950 .

MARTHA SMITH, CSJ ARCHIVES & RESEARCH CENTER
Second Floor, Whitfield Center

Ext. 3620

Located in the Hooley‐Bundschu Library and Learning Commons, the Martha Smith, CSJ Archives & Research Center
actively collects, preserves, and makes our collections available to students, faculty, staff and independent researchers.
The Archives is currently comprised of three collecting areas, the Women Religious Special Collections, the CSJ Heritage
Center Archives, and the Avila University Archives.
Women Religious Special Collections Begun in the fall of 1997, these collections are unique as the first
college/university Special Collection focused entirely on the experience of Catholic sisters and nuns. Intended as a
repository for out‐of‐print and contemporary books, manuscripts, pamphlets, photographs, ephemera and other
materials by, for and about American sisters, the Women Religious Special Collections were created to provide
researchers with access to these materials, which relate to the communities and activities of sisters and nuns in the
United States.
CSJ Heritage Center Archives Contains the records of the U. S. Federation of the Sisters of Saint Joseph. The Federation
is an association of congregations of women religious who acknowledge Saint Joseph as their patron, Father Medaille
as their founder, and share a common tradition and a unique spirit as their heritage. The Federation records describe
the structure of the organization by giving details of its origin in 1966, as well as its administrative features, including
the officers, official meetings and committee structures and activities.
Avila University Archives Within these collections you will find a wide variety of primary source material that relate s to
all aspects of the history of Avila University, from its foundation in 1916 to the present day. These materials include

13

official records, university publications, photographs, ephemera, memorabilia, as well as materials related to alumni,
former faculty, staff and administrators. All materials within the Martha Smith, CSJ Archives & Research Center are non‐
circulating. However, we welcome researchers, visitors, and questions. If you would like to schedule a visit, have
materials we might be interested in, or would like further details about the Archives, please contact the Archivist at
816‐501‐3620 or via email at, msarchives@avila.edu

MINISTRY, SPIRITUALITY & ACTION
David.Armstrong@avila.edu
Ext. 2423
Carondelet Hall
► Enter doorway on fountain side of the building
Foyle Hall
► Chapel and Chaplain Office
Campus Ministers
► Office hours are normal business hours and many evening hours. You are always welcome
to drop in, but an appointment is recommended to guarantee a meeting. E‐mail Dave.Armstrong@avila.edu
Chaplain
► You are welcome to drop in, but an appointment is recommended to guarantee a meeting.
E‐mail Keith.Branson@avila.edu
Chapel Hours
► Seven‐days a week ► 7 a.m. – 9 p.m.
Chapel Use
► Chapel is available for all students and groups to use for prayer and other appropriate
occasions or proceedings. To inquire about chapel use, contact the Director of Campus Ministries.
More Information
► http://www.avila.edu/campuslife/campus‐ministry/ ,
https://www.facebook.com/avilacampusministries
Mass Times: Sundays at 11:00 a.m. ***
Holy Day Masses: Check Schedule for times.
Confessions: By appointment: E‐mail Fr. Keith Branson at keith.branson@avila.edu
***All masses are held in Orscheln Chapel in Foyle Hall. Everyone is welcomed to attend.
Masses are held only when school is in session and are not held on holiday weekends or Fall break,
Thanksgiving, and Spring break unless otherwise posted. The mass schedule may vary throughout the semester
according to other events on campus. Please pick up a Mass schedule from the Office of Campus Ministries or consult
the web site.
Spiritual Direction/Pastoral Assistance: You may contact the Director of Ministries or te Chaplain if you would like
spiritual guidance or would like to discuss any other concern or need. We are here for you, to help you and to guide you
in your faith and life journey.
MINISTRY:
We are here to serve the spiritual needs of all students who attend Avila. Therefore, there is nothing to join. Your level
of involvement is up to you. You may choose to become heavily involved in our ministries through leadership or
occasionally involved by attending any of the many worship services, prayer groups, community service programs,
retreats or community events we offer that are student led and organized. There are many ways to be a part of campus
ministry.
Here are ways to be involved…
● Leadership: Student leaders typically meet once per week to plan events focusing on community service, prayer and
worship and developing our Avila community.
● Small Faith Communi es : These prayer groups/Bible studies meet for six‐week increments over the course of each
semester.
● Worship Services: The Avila community celebrates mass together and everyone is welcome.

14

● First Year Retreat: Each Fall we take ﬁrst year students on retreat to discern how to keep God as the foundation of
their college experience.
● Other retreats: Each semester we oﬀer 2 busy person retreats and in the spring, a student‐led overnight retreat.
● Jerusalem Farm Retreats: These specialized weekend retreats are oﬀered on weekends once per semester.
● Other prayer events: Food 4 the Soul: every Monday night, dinner is served in the Ministry Ac vity
Room in Carondelet Hall after we share prayer together. Dinner & Dialogue: Every second Wednesday night, we offer
free catered food and special topic for discussion.
● Community Nights: Once per month Campus Ministry sponsors a fun‐filled fellowship event. Events include ice cream
socials, cookouts, pumpkin carving, chili cook‐off, and much more.
Other Faiths: Avila welcomes and treasures people of all faiths. If you need help finding a place of worship that would
best enrich your faith experience, please contact Campus Ministries. We have a list of several churches and
denominations in the area. We encourage all faith traditions to join us for as much as they feel comfortable. We
especially invite you to join us for a service immersion trip throughout the year.
Other Needs: If you have a program or service (e.g. Prayer group, Bible Study, Service idea) that you would like to
coordinate and lead, let us know. We would be happy to assist you in your efforts. E‐mail
David.armstrong@avila.edu

REGISTRATION & STUDENT RECORDS
studentrecords@avila.edu
Blasco Hall , Upper Level
Office Hours: Mon – Fri ► 8 am – 5 pm

Ext. 2410

Please check the Avila website for important student information. Your grades, class schedule, advising information,
and financial accounts are available via your MyAU portal. Official notifications are sent via your Avila e‐mail account.
Listed below you will find just a few of the many services the registration office provides:
● Registra on and drop/add in Avila courses
● Oﬀ‐campus course permission requests
● Change in advisor, catalog, major and/or minor requests
● Academic transcript, enrollment verification and credential requests
● Interna onal students – I‐20 issuance and practical training request submissions
The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) requires students to show a picture ID and/or provide a written
signature, to obtain copies of official academic documents.

RESIDENCE LIFE
GeneralResidenceLife@avila.edu
Carondelet Hall, room 105
Office Hours: Mon – Fri ► 9 am – 5 pm

Ext. 3748

As an integral part of the Student Life office, the Residence Life Program strives to complement a student’s academic
program through a community living experience. Along with the convenience of living on campus, living in the
residence halls allows you to interact with students of diverse backgrounds, cultural experiences, and lifestyles.
Each residence hall consists of a fully air‐conditioned environment, featuring student rooms to accommodate up to 379
students, professional live‐in staff, and well‐trained student and graduate student staff. The residence hall complex

15

contains lounges, kitchen facilities, and laundry facilities. Each student room comes complete with cable television
service, local telephone service, and Internet service.
Additional information about the residence halls, including the community living standards, staff contact information,
and processes and procedures can be found in the residence life sections of this handbook.
To find out how to become more involved in residence life, contact 816.501.3748.

STUDENT ACCESS
DSO@avila.edu
Slepitza Center for Student Excellence, Hodes
Office Hours: Mon – Fri ► 8 am – 5 pm

Ext. 3666

Evening & weekend appointments available by special arrangement.
Avila University welcomes students with disabilities who can be successful learners and contributors to the Avila
community. To apply for accommodations in your learning environment (curricular and co‐curricular), please contact
Student Access. The Student Access staff welcomes questions, issues and concerns. For more information or schedule
an appointment, call Student Access or visit the Avila website.

STUDENT ACTIVITIES AND STUDENT LIFE
studentlifega@avila.edu
Marian Center Lower Level
Office Hours: Mon – Fri ► 8 am – 5 pm

Ext. 3754

The office of student life supports over 30 student organizations that sponsor activities such as social events,
entertainment, speakers, trips, recreation, films, leadership development, workshops, publications, and service
learning. Our goal is to create leadership and involvement opportunities where students can enhance leadership skills
and personal development. The office of student life also coordinates the operation of the Eagle’s Nest, located in
Marian Center and new student orientation activities.
Information about and referral to a variety of campus services are available in this office, including information
concerning the Student Handbook and the Student Code of Conduct. If students have any needs or interests that are
not being addressed, they may contact the office at any time.
For free tickets that may be available to Avila students, contact the student activities office.

Student Success
avilasuccess@avila.edu
Slepitza Center for Student Excellence, Hodes 103 and 104
Office Hours: Mon – Fri ► 8 am – 5 pm
Evening appointments may be available by special arrangement.

Ext. 3760

Avila students will find academic, personal, and holistic support designed to enhance student growth. The office
promotes success through the coordination of the First Year Experience which includes FS 101 (First Year Seminar), the
Common Reading Program, the Harry S. Truman Distinguished Lecture, and the First Year Publication.

16

Another area of support is Success Coaching. This coaching is a primary strategy encouraged as a result of Academic
Progress Reports, Mid‐Term Grades, Academic Probation and the promotion of Student Course Registration. Coaching
can also be used to learn more about common skills needed for college such as time management and study strategies.
The Office of Student Success also coordinates the 15 to Finish program which promotes the successful completion of
15 credit hours each semester which puts a student on pace to graduate in four years.

TEXT MESSAGES
Avila University has created a text message alert service as one method by which members of the Avila community may
be contacted in the event of an emergency.
Avila University uses Regroup as our mass notification/text alert system, so please be sure your cellphone number is
updated as that information is uploaded to our secured notification software. To update your cellphone number, log‐in
to MyAU, at the header row click on [Forms], then in the left column click on [Notification Info]. Input your phone
number, click [Submit], and the next time Avila University puts out a notice about an emergency on campus or a school
closing due to weather, you will get a message.
What to do in an emergency on campus | Avila University

TRIO OFFICES‐STUDENT SUPPORT SERVICES AND UPWARD BOUND
upward.bound@avila.edu
Slepitza Center for Student Excellence, Hodes
Office Hours
► Mon, ‐ Fri ► 8 am – 5 pm

Ext. 2439 OR 3719

The TRIO program funded by the U.S. Department of Education to help low income and first generation high school &
college students successfully overcome barriers to higher education. Program participants receive year‐round tutoring
and examples of successful college campus experiences. Program staff work in partnership with Avila faculty, staff and
students to help low income and first generation participants realize their goal to successfully attain a college
education.

III. STUDENT CODE OF CONDUCT
PURPOSE OF THE CODE
As a Catholic University, sponsored by the Sisters of St. Joseph of Carondelet, Avila maintains a position that its
educational role is more than an exchange of knowledge and the pursuit of wisdom. Avila is committed to the
educational development of the total person and seeks to develop an environment that is conducive to academic,
social, spiritual, personal, and physical growth with an emphasis on individual self‐discipline and responsibility. The
Student Code of Conduct serves to create an environment in which students have the best chance to learn, to study, to
grow as members of our campus community, and the greater global community. This Student Code of Conduct allows
members of our diverse community to live in harmony, to interact effectively, and to learn from each other.
The University operates from a value system in which caring, sharing and respect are paramount. While we value
diversity and seek to serve all segments of society, we do not aspire to be only a reflection of society. We seek higher
goals, with higher values, and higher standards. This is the community that you have chosen; one that expects more
from itself, more from one another, and more from you.

17

It is the intent of this Code to set forth in a clear, concise and uniform manner the expectations of students who join
with the University community and to set forth administrative and judicial procedures whereby those accused of
violating the rules may be treated fairly.

APPLICATION OF THE CODE
Students attending Avila University automatically place themselves under the jurisdiction of the Student Code of
Conduct. It is of paramount importance for students to familiarize themselves with the rules and regulations affecting
them. Participation in the Avila community entails responsibilities as well as privileges. Acceptance and adherence to
these policies are necessary for the protection of the rights of others and the community. Violation of the policies and
procedures contained within the Student Handbook may limit your privileges and jeopardize your membership in the
Avila University community.
Attendance at a private educational institution is not compulsory. The individual who enters this community voluntarily
assumes obligations of performance and behavior required by the institution, relevant to its purposes, mission & values
and functions. These obligations are generally higher than those imposed on citizens by civil and criminal laws. The
Student Code of Conduct, and the policies and procedures contained within it, apply to all students enrolled in any
program on our campus. The Code applies to all University premises and at all University activities whether on or off
campus. As the development of character consistent with our community values is a critical educational purpose, the
Code may also apply to student behavior even when it is off campus and unconnected to a school activity if the conduct
adversely impacts the University community or its objectives.

POLICIES AND PROCEDURES UNDER THE CODE
Contained within this Student Handbook you will find a listing of policies and procedures designed to help achieve the
overall purpose of the Code – to create a harmonious living/learning environment. While not intended to be all‐
inclusive, the items contained in this handbook should offer guidance and example for anyone trying to live by the
values and mission of this institution. The policies set forth basic standards of behavior and conduct. Students are
expected to adhere to the letter and the spirit of these standards. When appropriate, students shall participate in the
formulation of policies and rules pertaining to student conduct and in the enforcement of such rules.
It is impossible to list every type of violation possible under the Student Code of Conduct. The ideal is to have as few
regulations as possible and to be guided by broad statements that exemplify who we are as an institution and the
values we hold dear. Even if a type of behavior is not covered under the University Policies section of this handbook,
the Mission of the University, the Values of the University should guide us all, and the statements made above
concerning the purpose and application of the Student Code of Conduct.
We expect all members of the community to have respect for oneself, respect for others, respect for property, respect
for authority, and to conduct themselves in an honest and truthful manner.
We expect all members to live in harmony, to interact effectively, and to learn from each other. Although the following
list is not intended to be all‐inclusive, normally, misconduct of the following nature is subject to discipline and/or civil
and criminal penalties:
1. Dishonesty such as cheating, plagiarism, or knowingly furnishing false or misleading information to
University officials
2. Forgery: alteration or use of University documents, records, or instruments of identification with intent to
defraud
3. Action which disrupts or tends to disrupt teaching, research, administration, disciplinary proceedings, or
other University activities on or off University premises or which endangers or tends to endanger the safety,
health, or life of a person, including but not limited to:

18

a. physical or verbal abuse of any person;
b. sexual assault of any person;
c. hazing in any and all forms;
d. disorderly conduct, loud, indecent or obscene conduct
e. turning in false fire alarms or tampering with fire equipment.
4. Action that damages or tends to damage public property or private property not one’s own
5. Appropriating for one’s own use public or private property without the consent of the owner or the person
legally responsible for that property
6. Physical contact of a sexual nature, whether in public or private, is prohibited on campus.
7. Actions inconsistent with published rules relating to the use of campus buildings and other facilities
8. Actions inconsistent with the mission statement of the University
9. Failure to comply with directions of University officials acting in the performance of their duties
10. Violations of civil laws and University regulations concerning the possession and/or use of illegal drugs and
alcoholic beverages
11. Violations of federal, state and municipal laws or any other conduct not included above which adversely
affects the function of the University and the pursuit of its educational purposes and objectives

STANDARD OF PROOF FOR STUDENT RESPONSIBILITY
In any hearing to determine whether a student is responsible for violating University policies, the standard used is a
“preponderance of evidence” (i.e. “more likely than not”) as used in civil situations. The standard is not “beyond a
reasonable doubt” as is used in criminal cases.
Violations and condoning violations ‐ Simply put, if a student is where a violation is occurring, he/she has two choices,
one to leave, the other to stay. If the student chooses to stay, he/she may be found in violation, which will result in
University disciplinary action. The student is responsible for knowing what is going on in a room he/she is visiting. “I
didn’t see anything” or “I didn’t know” will not be considered excuses for violations.

INTERACTION WITH LOCAL AUTHORITIES
When a student has been apprehended for violations of local, state or federal laws, the University will not request or
agree to special consideration due to that individual's status as a student. The University will cooperate fully with law
enforcement agencies and other agencies responsible for rehabilitation efforts. In addition to any action taken by civil
or criminal authorities, the University reserves the right to impose its own disciplinary sanctions if the University
believes that the student's conduct interferes with the purposes, objectives or responsibilities of the University.
While the activities covered by the laws of the larger community and those covered by the University’s rules may
overlap, it is important to note that the community’s laws and the University’s rules operate independently and that
they do not substitute for each other. The University may pursue enforcement of its own rules whether or not legal
proceedings are underway or in prospect and may use information from third party sources, such as law enforcement
agencies and the courts, to determine whether University rules have been violated.

THE DISCIPLINE PROCESS
Students violating the policies and/or standards of conduct contained in this handbook will be referred to the
appropriate campus authority depending on where the violation occurred, the person(s) involved, and the type of
violation. Ultimately, it is the duty of the assistant vice president of student development and success to enforce the
Student Code of Conduct. The assistant vice president of student development and success may designate other
department(s) and/or campus official(s) in monitoring and regulating the Code as he/she deems appropriate. At times,
the assistant vice president of student development and success may immediately intervene and administer the

19

disciplinary process directly through his/her office or his/her designee. This may include, per the discretion of a vice
president, a choice of various disciplinary processes or procedures deemed best suited to meet the educational needs
of the student(s) involved and the interests of the University community.

TEMPORARY SUSPENSION
As a general rule, an individual's status as a student shall not be altered until a hearing occurs, and the issues involving
violation of policies have been discussed with that student. Experience has shown, however, that prompt and decisive
disciplinary action may be required in extreme cases before there is an opportunity to conduct a hearing as in cases
where a student's continued presence on campus constitutes a threat or injury to the well‐being or property of the
University community or to the orderly functioning of the University. The assistant vice president of student
development and success, or their designee(s), may immediately remove a person from campus until such time a
disciplinary hearing may be conducted. Any member of the Avila University community can submit incident reports.
Incidents involving behavior in the residence halls should be given to the appropriate residence life official. Incidents
involving behavior outside of the residence halls should be submitted to the director of student life.

DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES
1. The discipline process is usually initiated by the writing of an “Incident Report” concerning the alleged
violation of campus policies. Or if the University is given notice of possible policy violations.
2. Alleged violations of Avila University rules and regulations will result in a fact‐finding investigation.
Students either directly or indirectly involved with the alleged violation may receive a request from the
University official conducting the investigation for a meeting. A student’s failure to respond to a request to
meet for such a purpose is considered a serious violation itself that could result in immediate sanctions and
loss of any right to appeal.
3. The University official will meet and conduct a disciplinary hearing with the student(s) alleged to have
violated University policy. The student(s) will be informed of the alleged violation of University policy.
The student(s) will be free to present his/her side of what happened. If the student(s) refuses to participate the
process will continue without their contribution.
4. If the student is found responsible for violating campus policies, then the University official will also
determine the appropriate sanction(s) for the violation and a time frame for its completion. The student will be
given a discipline form or letter detailing the violation(s) for which he/she is being held responsible and
detailing the sanction parameters. Students involved in sexual assault, dating violence, domestic violence
and/or stalking policy hearings will be given sanctions concurrently and within 24 hours of findings.
5. The student does not have the right to representation by legal counsel at most hearings. Students involved
in sexual assault, dating violence, domestic violence and stalking investigations are allowed to have attorneys
present as advisors only. Students who have concurrent criminal charges pending against them are permitted
to consult with counsel during their disciplinary hearing although the role of counsel is limited to consultation
only.
6. Possible levels of sanctions and consequences from each level are described in the Level System section
below. Decisions involving Level 1 offenses cannot be appealed. Decisions involving Level 2 or higher offenses
can be appealed to the hearing officer’s supervisor according to the appeal process listed below.
7. Should the student wish to appeal the decision of the University official for a situation where appeals are
permissible, he/she must submit a written request to the appropriate University official, usually the supervisor
of the University official presiding over the original hearing. All appeal requests must be made within five
working days of receipt of the original sanction. Grounds for the appeal must be contained in the appeal
request. Standard grounds for an appeal include:
a. original hearing was not conducted fairly in accordance with set procedures;
b. the decision wasn’t based on substantial information;
c. the sanctions imposed were inappropriate for the violation;

20

The University official reviewing the appeal will communicate his/her decision to the student.

THE LEVEL SYSTEM
The disciplinary process at Avila involves the use of certain levels and disciplinary sanctions. Since no two incidents are
identical, campus officials will use their discretion in issuing appropriate sanctions that best fit the policy violation and
the circumstances involved. The list of sanctions is not all‐inclusive and the sanctions can be used at all levels. It is
important to remember that the levels need not be sequential in order. In other words, a student may be immediately
placed on a higher level of sanctions without progressing sequentially through the lower levels (i.e. an incident listed as
a Level 1 may, based on the circumstances, result in a finding of Level 2 responsibility and sanction). In addition, the
following is meant to be a guideline, not a cookbook, of possible sanctions resulting from policy violations. If there is a
cost associated with an element of a student’s sanction, the cost will be the responsibility of that student.
Level 1: Warning Status
Typical consequences:
1. Students will receive a written warning
2. He/she may also lose special privileges, may have special conditions attached, or
3. May be required to make fiscal restitution
4. May be required to deliver an apology to those affected by the behavior/violation
Level 2: Probationary Status – Disruptive behavior of a more serious nature
Typical consequences include the range of sanctions available in a Level 1 violation and the possible implementation of
additional sanctions. Examples can include:
1. Loss of special residence hall and/or other campus privileges or the addition of special conditions that need
to be fulfilled
2. Loss of participation in any University sponsored activities and functions such as athletics, student
government, etc.
3. FERPA, the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, is a Federal law that regulates disclosure of,
and access to, educational records of students. This statute allows a university to notify parents/legal
guardians of students under the age of 21 that the student has been found responsible for violation of the
university’s policies regarding alcohol consumption and/or drug use.
4. Community restitution behavioral expectations, including referral to the University Counseling & Career
Services Office or various referrals to other on/off‐campus offices and/or agencies.
5. Sanctions emulating restorative justice practices‐giving back what was taken by the behavior/violation
Level 3: Final Warning Status
This level means that your behavior severely calls into question your suitability as an Avila student. Any further
violations will result in a recommendation for your suspension and/or dismissal.
Typical consequences include the range of sanctions available in a Level 2 violation and the possible implementation of
the following additional sanctions:
1. Expulsion from the residence halls
Students removed from the halls are not entitled to any financial refund or release from financial liability. Food
service privileges may or may not be affected. Students may be forced to move out of the residence halls
immediately, although an attempt will be made to allow the student time to find other housing arrangements.
The time allotted for moving out will not normally exceed 24 hours.
2. Loss of the ability to represent the University in any official capacity and severe restrictions on your activities
on campus
3. Any other sanction designed to help the student learn and be accountable for his/her actions

21

Level 4: Suspension
This level is one of involuntary separation of the student from the University for a definite period of time after which
the student is eligible to return. The disciplinary authority may establish additional individual requirements that must
be fulfilled by the student prior to reinstatement.
Level 5: Dismissal
This sanction is one of involuntary separation of the student from the University. The separation is permanent in that it
does not project a definite time of eligibility to return. Any student who has been dismissed from the
University for a disciplinary reason may be readmitted only by the authority of the president upon the recommendation
of the assistant vice president of student development and success.

IV. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
AVILA UNIVERSITY ACADEMIC HONOR CODE
Avila University is a values based community whose members dedicate themselves to excellence in teaching and
learning. The Avila Value Statements guide and inform the actions and choices of all members of the Avila Community.
In accordance with the University mission, students, staff and faculty commit to uphold the highest standards of
academic integrity and personal conduct. Adhering to the Avila University Academic Honor Code will be reflected
through actions, intentions, and support of the common good and means that members will:
demonstrate ethical behavior;
take responsibility for one's own learning;
build trust within the community;
produce credible work.
DEFINITIONS OF ACADEMIC DISHONESTY
Academic Dishonesty is the process in which an individual or a group engages in an unethical behavior to alter the
integrity of an academic work or an academic requirement. Examples of academic dishonesty include but are not
limited to the following:
Plagiarism is the act of taking ideas from another and representing them as one’s own work without acknowledging the
source. Examples include not using proper citations to indicate the true source for an assessment, copying or pasting
someone else’s work in an assignment, and submitting a similar or identical work completed by someone else.
Cheating is giving or receiving unauthorized information prior, during or after an exam or assignment. Examples include
but are not limited to copying answers from another student’s work, communication via voice or electronic devices to
other students before, during or after an exam, using hidden notes and/or stored information on electronic devices
during an exam, signaling answers, taking pictures of an exam or another student’s work, and unauthorized use of
internet access.
Fabrication is the falsification of data, citations, unauthorized signatures or other information for an academic
assessment. Examples include fictitious sources to meet bibliography requirements, falsifying lab results submitting
someone else’s work as your own, and changing answers or a grade on a returned assessment to claim an error in
grading.
Impersonation is a situation when a person other than the student completes an academic assessment. The person
completing the assessment and the one making the request are both engaging in academic dishonesty. Examples
include having someone else write a paper take a placement, online, or in‐class.
Deception is providing false information. Examples include false claims to request deadline extensions or excused
absences, claiming they have submitted or completed work when they actually have not, or providing false information
on any University application.

22

Sabotage is destroying or preventing access to materials or disrupting the academic work of other students. Examples
include removing materials or equipment, deleting files, or destroying or manipulating others’ work.
Complicity is knowingly contributing to or witnessing an act of academic dishonesty and not reporting it. Examples
include not reporting to the designated office.
Multiple Submission is the act of submitting a previously completed assessment in a prior course at Avila or another
university for an assessment in a different course to earn credit, unless prior approval has been granted by the
instructor. An example is a paper that has graded for another course and then resubmitting that same paper for the
new course to meet the course requirements.
Misuse of Intellectual Property via information Technology is accessing network systems (hacking) to steal information,
violating copyright agreements, or disrupting electronic communications. Examples include modifying computer
software or hardware to gain unauthorized access to information or data, using copyrighted material (unless it is “fair
use”) without permission, illegally downloading protected files (sharing movies, music, film, texts and other materials
without authorization or purchase), and defeating or attempting to bypass or defeat security systems put into place to
assure confidentiality of information.
Forgery is the imitation or counterfeiting of signatures and documents e.g. for admission, internship, financial aid
requirements.
Processes for Academic Honor Council
1.(a)
Any instructor who discovers that a student has substantively compromised the integrity of an academic work
or requirement or otherwise violated the Academic Honor Code must report the violation and provide documentation,
including an Academic Honesty Incident Report, to the Dean associated with the academic course. The Dean will report
the offense to the Academic Vice President (or their designee) and the academic advisor and provide each with a copy
of the documentation. The instructor will decide on the course related sanction for the offense (for example: a warning,
zero on assignment, “F” in the course, etc.). If the violation is not associated with an academic course the violation is
reported to the Dean of the school of the student’s first major.
1.(b)
Any member of the Avila University community, other than an instructor, who has personal, first‐hand
knowledge that a student has violated the Academic Honor Code must report the violation and provide an Academic
Honesty Incident Report and any other documentation to the Dean associated with the academic course or to the
Academic Vice President who notify the Dean. If the violation is not associated with an academic course the violation is
reported to the Dean of the school of the student’s first major.
For the first offense, the student will receive written notification of the reported violation from the Dean and must
meet with the Dean and his/her academic advisor. Depending on the severity of the offense, the Dean may impose
sanctions and/or request that the student meet with the Academic Honor Council. If the student fails to appear or to
follow recommendations, he/she will not be allowed to enroll in the next semester.
For the second offense, the student will receive written notification of the reported violation from and must meet with
the Academic Vice President. Depending on the severity of the offense the Academic Vice President may impose
sanctions and/or request that the student meet with the Academic Honor Council. If the student fails to appear or to
follow recommendations, he/she will not be allowed to enroll in the next semester.
If a third offense is reported the student will be required to attend an official hearing before the Academic Honor
Council which will determine the sanction. The sanction may include but is not limited to:
a.
Warning only
b.
Required meeting with relevant campus offices
c.
Notification of co‐curricular advisors for possible disciplinary action
d.
Suspension from school for a set period of time and may be required to meet certain
criteria/conditions in order to return.
e.
Dismissal from the University

23

If a student is allowed to continue at the University after the third offense, and a fourth offense is reported, the
Academic Honor Council will meet to determine need for further review or immediate dismissal from the University.
Individual program policies pertaining to integrity and academic honesty take precedence over policies and procedures
set forth in the Academic Honor Code. Nonetheless, all incidents of academic dishonesty must be reported as set forth
in the Academic Honor Code.
Records of accumulated reported offenses of compromised integrity will be maintained in the office of the Vice
President for Academic Affairs. When the student successfully graduates from Avila University, these records will be
destroyed.

ALCOHOL AND DRUG POLICY
The misuse of alcohol and other drugs pose major health problems are potential safety and security problems, can
adversely affect academic and job performance, and can generally inhibit the educational development of students.
Avila University, therefore, prohibits the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, or use of illicit*
drugs and alcohol. This applies to all premises or property, or as part of any official student activity, associated with
Avila University.
*Illicit drugs include illegal drugs (such as cannabis, opiates, and certain types of stimulants), pharmaceutical drugs
(such as painkillers and tranquillizers) when used for non‐medical purposes, and other substances used inappropriately
(such as inhalants).
Avila University’s alcohol and drug policy is an awareness and prevention program in compliance with the Drug‐Free
Schools and Communities Act of 1986 and as amended in 1989. This policy will be distributed annually to each
university employee and each university student currently enrolled.
This Policy is not limited to, but does specifically include:
 The possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages, or the possession of alcohol paraphernalia, is
prohibited anywhere on campus or at campus events unless explicitly allowed by the appropriate University
Vice President.
 Possessing, using, being in the presence of, or distribution of illicit drugs, Federal‐listed controlled substances
(including marijuana), or drug paraphernalia is strictly prohibited.
 Attending classes, events or participating in any college activities while under the influence of or impaired by
alcohol or other illicit drugs is prohibited.
 Disorderly behavior, excessive noise, odor, vandalism, damage to University property, or other disruptive
behavior related to possessing, using, or being in the presence of alcohol or illicit drugs will not be permitted.
 Empty or full alcohol containers, such as bottles, cans, kegs, “party balls”, or devices commonly used for
consumption of alcohol or illicit drugs, such as beer bongs and glass smoking pipes, are not allowed to be
stored nor displayed in the University Residence Halls. Possession of items promoting alcohol or illicit drug use
or a brand, such as drinking glasses or posters, are not permitted in the University Residence Halls.
 Consuming, by inhaling, any drugs (including cannabis), tobacco, or vape is not permitted in the University
Residence Halls or in its parking lots, regardless If it is being consumed in a car.
Exception: the following specific Alcohol Policy is written for Thompson Hall:
 Alcoholic beverages may be responsibly consumed or possessed, in compliance with Federal, State and Local
regulations, only within individuals' suites in Thompson Hall where all assigned residents are 21 years of age
and have completed education steps through the Assistant Vice President of Student Development and
Success’ office, and all guests present must be 21 years of age.

24

Violation of any element of this policy may result in disciplinary action, in addition Avila University may notify the
student’s parents or guardian of the violation if the student is under 21 years of age. While Avila University respects
students’ right to privacy, it retains its right to enter any residence hall room if there is reason to believe that University
policies have been violated. Avila University is an institution of higher education located on private property that
complies with Missouri revised statutes RSMo. 311 (liquor control laws) and RSMo. 195 and 579 (drug paraphernalia
and controlled substances offenses).
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS FOR STUDENTS:
Students who violate the above regulations are subject to disciplinary sanctions. Possible sanctions range from a Level
1 Warning up to and including a Level 5 Dismissal from the institution.
In conjunction with the imposition of any of the disciplinary sanctions set forth in the Student Code of Conduct,
students may also be referred to appropriate local, state or federal law enforcement agencies for prosecution.
In conjunction with the imposition of any of the disciplinary sanctions set forth above, students may be required to
complete appropriate counseling, rehabilitation or substance abuse program.
FERPA, the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, is a Federal law that regulates disclosures of, and access
to, educational records of students. This statute allows a university to notify parents/legal guardians of students under
the age of 21 that the student has been found responsible for violation of the university’s policies regarding alcohol
consumption and/or drug use.
All disciplinary proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with or as provided by the Student Code of Conduct.
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS FOR EMPLOYEES:
To promote Avila University’s goal of a drug‐free, healthful, and safe workplace, employees are required to report to
work in appropriate mental and physical condition to perform their jobs in a satisfactory and/or safe manner. All
employees of the University serve as role models for students.
Violations of the above policy may lead to disciplinary action, up to and including immediate termination of
employment, and/or required participation in a substance abuse rehabilitation or treatment program.
Violations of this policy may also have legal consequences.
Under the Drug‐Free Workplace Act, an employee, who performs work for a government contract or grant, must notify
Avila University of a criminal conviction for drug‐related activity occurring in the workplace. The report must be made
within five days of the conviction.
LEGAL SANCTIONS:
In addition to University policy violations, there are legal consequences that may occur for violating federal, state, or
local alcohol and drug laws. The severity of sanctions imposed for offenses will vary and is dependent on type and
quantity of drugs, prior convictions, if serious injury or death resulted, and can also be increased for offenses involving
drugs on or near university premises. Drug convictions can effect a person’s right to purchase a firearm, to receive
federal financial aid benefits for college, and/or effect professional or commercial licenses. Even with reduced charges
in the State of Missouri for small quantities of marijuana possession, it is a misdemeanor charge on your record for a
controlled substance that could have future negative effects.
The Liquor Control Law for the State of Missouri (RSMo. 311) provides that any person under the age of 21 years who
purchases, attempts to purchase or has in his/her possession any intoxicating liquor is guilty of a misdemeanor crime.
Anyone who shall procure for, sell, give away or otherwise supply intoxicating liquor to any person under the age of 21
years is guilty of a misdemeanor crime. It is a Class A misdemeanor for a property owner to knowingly allow or to fail
to stop, a person under the age of 21 to drink or possess intoxicating liquor. Missouri law also includes that a person
under the age of 21 who is visibly intoxicated can be arrested without being in physical possession at that time of the
intoxicating beverage. A person who is convicted of a misdemeanor may be subjected to a fine ranging from $50 to
$1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year.
A person commits the crime of “driving while intoxicated” (DWI) if he/she operates a motor vehicle while in an
intoxicated or drugged condition, as stated in Missouri Revised Statute 577. A person is in an “intoxicated condition”

25

when he/she is under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance, other illicit drug, or any combination thereof.
The first offense of a DWI is a Class B misdemeanor with fines up to $1,000, but multiple offenses can range up to a
Class B felony charge, a loss of driver’s license, and/or imprisonment up to 15 years.
State Law prohibits the manufacturing, possession, sale, and distribution of illicit drugs. Missouri revised statutes
RSMo. 195 and RSMo. 579 are known as the Comprehensive Drug Control Act. These statutes include prohibiting
possession with intent to use drug paraphernalia, unlawful use of drug paraphernalia, delivery or distribution of a
controlled substance, trafficking drugs, and other offenses as listed in RSMo. 579.015 through 579.170. Charges for
these offenses range from misdemeanor to felony and a person may be subjected to a fine ranging from $50 to $10,000
and/or imprisonment ranging from 6 months up to life (30 years).
Although most illicit drug offenses are prosecuted by state law, federal charges can occur if the defendant or the drug
crossed state lines. It is also of note that marijuana is listed as a controlled substance along with many other narcotics,
as defined by federal statute CFR 1308. Persons convicted of federal charges of drug trafficking within 1,000 feet of a
university also face higher penalties. If an individual is convicted of federal or state drug charges for possession,
distribution, or trafficking, the federal government may also deny or revoke federal benefits such as grants, loans, or
work study (see studentaid.ed.gov for more information).
HEALTH RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH ALCOHOL AND ILLICIT DRUGS:
Abuse of alcohol can produce severe health risks, including death. Alcohol consumption causes a number of marked
changes in behavior. Even low doses significantly impair judgment and coordination required to drive a car safely,
increasing the likelihood that the driver will be involved in an accident.
Low to moderate doses of alcohol also increase the incidence of a variety of aggressive acts, including spouse and child
abuse. Moderate to high doses of alcohol cause marked impairments in higher mental functions, severely altering a
person’s ability to learn and remember information. Very high doses cause respiratory depression and death. If
combined with other depressants of the central nervous system, even lower doses of alcohol will produce the effects
just described. Long‐term consumption of large quantities of alcohol, particularly when combined with poor nutrition,
can also lead to permanent damage to vital organs such as the brain and the liver.
Physical and psychological effects of both short and long‐term drug use vary with the type and amount of drug used.
Marijuana use can lead to heartbeat acceleration, impairment in mental perception, memory loss, impulsive behavior,
anxiety attacks, respiratory problems, infertility, and lung disease. Cocaine use can lead to high blood pressure,
sweating, vomiting, irritation and inflammation of nasal tissue, loss of appetite, delusions, altered perceptions, and
death from respiratory failure.
Use of hallucinogens can lead to dizziness, increase in heart rate, nausea, perceptual changes, delusions, hallucinations,
and flashbacks. Use of stimulants can lead to diarrhea, heart palpitations, increased blood pressure, kidney failure,
weight loss, irritability, and hallucinations. Use of depressants can lead to slurred speech, staggering gait, altered
perception, slowing down of reflexes and reaction time, increased anxiety and depression, and death from lack of
oxygen.
Mothers who drink alcohol during pregnancy may give birth to infants with fetal alcohol syndrome. These infants have
irreversible physical abnormalities and mental retardation. Use of illicit drugs during pregnancy may lead to premature
births and/or mental or physical handicaps in the infant. Use may also cause infant to acquire a drug dependency at
birth
DRUG AND ALCOHOL PROGRAMS:
Students with alcohol or other drug related problems are encouraged, and in some cases maybe be required, to utilize
the services of private and community agencies to receive appropriate information, treatment, counseling or referral
services. Avila’s Counseling and Career Services, in Hodes Center, offers short‐term counseling available to students

26

free of charge. Referrals to outside professionals in the area of alcohol or drug treatment may be appropriate.
Students are responsible to pursue these options on their own and at their own expense. A variety of campus
organizations and departments are involved in providing programs to all community members as to the risks of
substance abuse.
In addition to on‐campus and off‐campus counseling services, University employees have provisions of the Employee
Assistance Program available that include counseling for substance abuse.
The following resources are available off‐campus for counseling or substance abuse treatment:
Alcoholics Anonymous, Kansas City Area: 816.471.7229
www.kc‐aa.org
Narcotics Anonymous, Kansas City Metro: 816.531.2250 or 800.561.2250
www.kansascityna.org
www.na.org

ANTI‐HARASSMENT/ANTI‐DISCRIMINATION POLICY STATEMENT
Avila University’s policy is to maintain an environment for all of our employees and students that is free of unlawful
harassment, illegal discrimination, and unprofessional conduct. It is never justifiable to harass one of our employees or
students because of their race, color, gender, religion, national origin, age, disability, or sexual orientation. Unlawful
harassment is counterproductive and does not serve the principles on which Avila University operates. We respect the
dignity and worth of each employee and student. We believe that each employee and student should be free to
develop fully his or her potential, neither hindered by artificial barriers nor aided by factors that are not related to
merit. Avila University also prohibits unprofessional conduct and comments that may not amount to unlawful
harassment. All employees are expected to use good judgment and to avoid even the appearance of impropriety in all
of their dealings with other employees and students. Supervisory employees especially must exhibit the highest degree
of personal integrity at all times, refraining from any behavior that might be harmful to their subordinates, students or
to the University.
RACIAL, RELIGIOUS, SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND NATIONAL ORIGIN HARASSMENT
Racial, religious, sexual orientation, and national origin harassment is expressly prohibited. Racial, religious, sexual
orientation, and national origin harassment includes any oral statement, written statement, or physical act in which
race, religion, sexual orientation, or national origin is used or implied in a manner that make another person
uncomfortable in the work or educational environment or that would interfere with another person’s ability to perform
his or her job. Examples of racial, religious, sexual orientation, or national origin harassment include jokes that include
reference to race, religion, sexual orientation, or national origin. The display or use of objects or pictures that adversely
reflect on a person’s race, religion, sexual orientation, or national origin or use of language that is offensive due to a
person’s race, religion, sexual orientation, or national origin.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
Sexual harassment is a form of sex discrimination, which is illegal under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 for
employees and under Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 for students. Sexual harassment is also illegal
under Missouri State Law and prohibited by Avila University.
See Page 34 for more information ‐ Sexual and gender‐based harassment, sexual violence: Relationship and
interpersonal violence and stalking policy.
NO RETALIATION
It is strictly against University policy to retaliate against anyone who reports or assists in making a complaint of
prohibited harassment. Retaliation is contrary to this policy statement and may result in discipline up to and including
termination for employees and dismissal for students. Anyone who feels that retaliatory action has been taken because

27

of his or her report or assistance in making a complaint of prohibited harassment should immediately bring the matter
to the University’s attention as described below.
HOW TO REPORT INSTANCES OF HARASSMENT OR RETALIATION
The University cannot resolve matters that are not brought to its attention. Any student or employee, regardless of
position, who has a complaint of, or who witnesses harassment, or retaliation at work by anyone including instructors,
students, supervisors, managers, employees, or even non‐employees has a responsibility to immediately bring the
matter to the University’s attention. If the complaint or observation involves someone in the employee’s direct line of
command or if the employee is uncomfortable discussing the matter with his or her direct supervisor, the employee is
urged to go to another supervisor, a University vice president, or to the director of human resources.
If the complaint or observation involves a student, the report should go to the vice president for academic affairs or the
vice president for enrollment and student development. Student‐to‐student harassment complaints may be referred to
the disciplinary system in the school’s Student Code of Conduct for the appropriate investigation and resolution of such
complaints.
HOW THE UNIVERSITY WILL INVESTIGATE COMPLAINTS
The University will thoroughly and promptly investigate all claims of harassment or retaliation. A complainant will be
given the opportunity to provide a good faith list of persons who may have information regarding the subject matter of
the complaint, and a representative of the University will contact those persons. If an investigation confirms that
harassment or retaliation has occurred, the University will take prompt, corrective action as is appropriate. Complaints
of harassment and retaliation will be kept as confidential as possible.
AVILA’S COMMITMENT TO AN EFFECTIVE NO HARASSMENT POLICY
If you feel that the University has not met its obligations under this policy, you should contact the Office of Human
Resources.

BUILDING ACCESS
Campus facilities are open to students, faculty/staff and guests of the University at various hours for specific buildings
and areas. Check with the campus safety office for specific hours of operation. Campus safety makes rounds in each
building after they have been secured. Individuals found in buildings after hours will be asked to show identification,
and those who are in the buildings without proper authorization will be referred for disciplinary and/or criminal action.
Propping open the doors to any building especially the residence halls causes a significant security risk to those inside.
Such action will be viewed as a serious violation of school policy. Being in an unauthorized section of any building or in
any area for which public access is not allowed, including boiler rooms and roofs of buildings, is also strictly prohibited.

CAMERA / VIDEO RECORDING DEVICE USAGE
Due to the increased ability of technology to covertly capture and electronically distribute images across the Internet or
through other means, it is important to remember and to respect the privacy rights of all Avila Community members in
areas considered residential or restrictive on this campus. In addition, certain areas on campus will be considered
restricted as far as the use of any type of cameras (including cell phone cameras) or video recording devices. These
restricted areas would be the locker rooms, training rooms, health service rooms, or restroom areas on campus. In
these areas, all cameras must be kept inoperable and stowed away on your person or in a locked area. This rule
extends to any room or area that may be serving as a residential or restricted area in a similar manner as those listed
above.

28

CANCELED CLASSES DUE TO INCLEMENT WEATHER
Students will not be notified individually of class cancellations due to inclement weather. University officials will contact
local television and radio stations, and have the announcement made via their normal notification process. A notice
also will be placed on the University Web site. In situations where University officials have not canceled classes,
students are urged to use their own judgment in deciding whether it is safe to travel to campus. As in all situations,
students who miss classes will be held responsible for material covered during the class session.

CANCELLATION / WITHDRAWAL OF ENROLLED COURSES
avila.edu/registrar/withdraw
The link above shows the tables of criteria and timeline used for cancellation or withdrawal from enrolled courses and
tuition and fee adjustments. The actual last date for cancellation or withdrawal is determined by the length of the
course and/or the semester of the course. For questions, please contact the registration and student records office at
ext. 2410.
NOTE: The date the “Change of Program” form is filed in the registration and student records office is considered the
official date for determining cancellation/withdrawal and tuition adjustments.
Appeal Policy
Students who feel their individual circumstances warrant an exception from the cancellation or withdrawal policy may
appeal by submitting a signed appeal letter. The appeal letter should include a statement of the exception requested,
an explanation as to why an exception should be granted, and appropriate materials to support the request for the
exception. Send the signed letter and supporting materials to the Academic Affairs Office, Avila University, 11901
Wornall Road, Kansas City, MO 64145. Once all appeal materials are complete in the academic affairs office, the appeal
will be reviewed, and the student will receive written notification of the decision.
Student Cancellation of Registration
A cancellation of enrolled courses will result in the cancellation of all tuition and at times student fees. Student
Financial Services follows the refund schedule for each type of student:
https://www.avila.edu/_userfiles/Registrar/Refund_Schedule.pdf.Fees.
Administrative Cancellation of Registration
Undergraduate students who do not cancel by the last cancellation date and do not attend any courses may be
administratively cancelled. Administrative cancellations will result in a cancellation of tuition only. Fees are not
cancelled or refunded. If the student attends any classes, they cannot be administratively cancelled.
Graduate students who do not cancel their registration by 5 pm on the night of the first class and do not show up for
class (unless special arrangements have been made) will be administratively canceled from class. The administrative
cancellation will result in a refund of tuition only. Fees are not canceled.
Tuition Adjustments
https://www.avila.edu/student‐services/registrar/forms‐and‐resources/canceling‐withdraw‐course
The link above shows the tables of criteria and timeline used for cancellation or withdrawal from enrolled courses and
tuition and fee adjustments/refunds. The actual last date for cancellation or withdrawal is determined by the length of
the course and/or the semester of the course.
Other links:
https://www.avila.edu/_userfiles/Registrar/Refund_Schedule.pdf or
https://www.avila.edu/admission‐aid/tuition‐fees‐1/payments‐refunds
For questions on tuition refund policies, please contact the Student Financial Services at ext. 3700 or 3600.

29

Tuition Refund Appeal Policy
Students who feel their individual circumstances warrant an exception from the above‐stated tuition refund policy may
appeal by submitting a signed appeal letter. The appeal letter should include a statement of the exception requested,
an explanation as to why an exception should be granted, and appropriate materials to support the request for the
exception. Send the signed letter and supporting materials to the Academic Affairs Office, Avila University, 11901
Wornall Road, Kansas City, MO 64145 or to AcademicAffairs@avila.edu. Once all appeal materials are complete in the
academic affairs office, the appeal will be reviewed, and the student will receive written notification of the decision.
Appeals for tuition adjustments will generally be considered for up to one year from the last date of the semester in
which the tuition was charged.
Financial Aid Adjustments
NOTE: Please see https://www.avila.edu/admission‐aid/financial‐aid or visit the Avila University Student Financial
Services Office for complete policies.
Complete Withdrawal
Students who withdraw completely from all classes prior to the completion of 61 percent of the academic term are
required to return to the federal government the unearned portion of any federal financial aid the student has
received. If the student withdraws after completion of 60 percent of the academic term, the student is not required to
return the unused portion of federal funds.
The federal Return of Title IV Funds dictates the amount of Federal Title IV aid (e.g., Pell Grant, SEOG,
Federal loans, unsubsidized or subsidized, Stafford, Perkins or PLUS) that must be returned to the federal government.
The student may be required to repay some of the federal grants or loans released to the student’s account.
Change from Full‐time to Part‐time Status
Part‐time students are not generally eligible for Avila University institutional awards. Students who change from full‐
time to part‐time status prior to the completion of 60 percent of the academic term will lose their Avila University
awards (e.g., athletic awards, scholarship awards, transfer grants and awards). Federal aid will be reassessed based on
the number of enrolled hours, and the student is required to return to the federal government the unearned portion of
any federal financial aid the student has received. In some cases, changing from full‐time to part‐time may reduce the
amount of financial aid and will not reduce the amount of tuition and fees owed. The student is responsible for the
difference owed to Avila University.
The federal Return of Title IV Funds dictates the amount of Federal Title IV aid (e.g., Pell Grant, SEOG,
Federal loans, unsubsidized or subsidized, Stafford, Perkins or PLUS) that must be returned to the federal government.
The student may be required to repay some of the federal grants or loans released to the student’s account.
Return of Title IV Federal Student Aid
Students who withdraw from all courses before 61 percent of the semester has elapsed will be evaluated according to
the Department of Education guidelines and formula as stipulated by the Higher Education
Amendments of 1998. Federal aid is earned by the percentage of the payment period the student completes.
The percentage of aid earned is derived by dividing calendar days attended in the period by total days in that period.
Weekends are included, but scheduled breaks that are at least five (5) days long are excluded. If the student completes
more than 60 percent of the term, 100% of the aid is earned for the period and no immediate repayment obligation
results. If the student completes 60 percent or less of the term, the portion of the federal aid determined to be
unearned must be repaid to the federal programs. The Title IV federal programs that are affected include Pell Grants,
SEOG, Perkins Loans, and Stafford Subsidized and Unsubsidized loan programs. Federal aid programs are returned in
the following order: Stafford Unsubsidized Loan, Subsidized Loan, Perkins Loan, PLUS loan, Pell Grant, SEOG, and other
Title IV programs. Avila will return Title IV aid from the student’s account according to the federal formula. A student
may be required to return a Title IV aid overpayment. When a student receives notification from Avila of an
overpayment, the student has 45 days to return the funds to the business office. Students not complying with the 45‐
day requirement will be submitted to the Department of Education for collection. The student will be ineligible for

30

further Title IV aid until the overpayment has been paid in full or satisfactory repayment arrangements have been
made with the Department of Education.
The return of enrollment charges policy calculation and applicable institutional refunds will be done within 30 days of
the withdrawal date. A letter indicating the calculation results, any applicable refund or the adjusted statement of
charges will be sent to the student’s home address.
Return of Non‐Federal Student Aid
The return of federal funds is the first priority for students receiving federal aid. If the student received institutional aid,
state aid, or made personal payment, the institutional and state aid are repaid proportionally according to the source of
the payment. If repayment of aid programs results in a balance owed to Avila on the student’s account, it is the
responsibility of the student to repay the amount owed and that amount is due upon notification that a balance owed
exists.
Institutional Financial Aid Policy Appeal Process
Students who feel their individual circumstances warrant an exception from the above‐stated financial aid policy may
appeal by submitting a signed appeal letter. The appeal letter should include a statement of the exception requested,
an explanation as to why an exception should be granted, and appropriate materials to support the request for the
exception. Send the signed letter and supporting materials to the Student Financial Services Office, Avila University,
11901 Wornall Road, Kansas City, MO 64145. Once all appeal materials are complete in the financial aid office, the
appeal will be reviewed, and the student will receive written notification of the decision.
Residence Hall Refunds
Students who have been granted a withdrawal from the University may check‐out of the residence halls and receive
refunds as follows:
● Refunds will be calculated by dividing the total amount of their room and board contract by the number of weeks in
the semester and then multiplying that by the number of weeks they have resided in the residence halls. An
administrative fee of $200 will also be charged.
● Students who are dismissed from the halls for disciplinary reasons will not receive a refund.

COMMUNICABLE DISEASE POLICY
Avila University has a responsibility to ensure a safe environment and protect students, faculty and staff from
individuals who may pose a risk of spreading a reportable communicable disease. Reportable communicable diseases
included in this policy, which pose a significant health risk to others include (but are not limited to) measles, mumps,
German measles, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, tuberculosis, chickenpox, H1N1, HIV, AIDS, and meningitis.
It is the responsibility of persons diagnosed with (or those suspecting) any of the communicable diseases listed above
to report their concern to assistant vice president of student development and success. All cases will be dealt with on
an individual basis. Avila University respects that an individual with a reportable communicable disease has the right to
privacy and confidentiality.
Avila University students, faculty and staff diagnosed with a reportable communicable disease shall be allowed to work
and/or attend classes as long as they pose little or no risk of transmission of disease with reasonable precautions. If the
risk is greater, than persons diagnosed with a highly communicable disease may be asked to leave campus for the
length of time appropriate to the disease. Assistant Vice President of Student Development and Success may require
verification from a licensed healthcare professional for the person to return to work and/or to attend classes.
Guidelines for reporting and outbreak control measures will be followed in accordance with Kansas City,
Jackson County, and Missouri Department of Health standards. The Centers for Disease Control guidelines will be
followed as needed.

31

CONSENSUAL RELATIONSHIPS
Amorous relationships between persons of unequal power and position within an organization can lead to difficulties
and liabilities for all parties. Avila University considers amorous relationships between employees and students to be
unethical when the employee has professional responsibility for the student in the context of supervision, teaching, or
advisement or has direct power to control benefits, rewards, privileges, or penalties.

DRUGS
See ALCOHOL AND DRUG POLICY

EQUAL OPPORTUNITY IN EDUCATION
Avila University is an Equal Opportunity Employer and is committed to achieving and maintaining equal opportunity in
employment and personnel actions and procedures including, but not limited to, recruitment, hiring, training, transfer,
promotion, compensation, and services.
Further, Avila University is committed to nondiscrimination and equal opportunity to its students including, but not
limited to, recruitment, admissions, financial aid, educational policies, placement services, housing, athletics,
sponsorship, conduct of co‐curricular activities, and other University administered programs and services.
These policies for students, faculty, and staff are to be administered without regard to sex, race, religion, age color,
sexual orientation, disability, or national origin.
Any concerns regarding discrimination should be addressed to the director of human resources on the 1st floor of
Blasco Hall, 816.501.3618. Good faith concerns can be raised without fear of reprisal.

FACILITIES AND SERVICES
Avila University encourages the use of its facilities by Avila students and recognized student groups. Although many
facilities are used primarily for academic purposes, there are many locations that may be reserved (on a first‐come,
first‐serve basis) to conduct meetings, presentations and other programs. All use of Avila facilities and services must be
within the parameters of the Avila Mission, Values, and Student Code of Conduct. For a specific room set up, please fill
out an “Event Set Up Request” form and send it to the campus services office.

FAILURE TO RESPOND
Students are required to comply with the reasonable requests of University faculty and staff members acting in the
performance of their duties. This includes the requests of resident assistants and other housing staff personnel.

FAMILY EDUCATION RIGHTS AND PRIVACY ACT (FERPA)
Avila University is in compliance with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) of 1974. This Act, also
known as the Buckley Amendment, helps protect the privacy of student records. The Act provides for the right to
inspect and review educational records, to seek to amend those records, and to limit disclosure or information from the
records.
Official student records are maintained in the Registration and Student Records Office.

32

Students and parents of dependent students may request to review official educational records under the following
procedure.
• The student must provide a written request to review the education record. Written requests need to
identify the record(s) requested for review. Parents of dependent students must supply evidence of the
income‐tax dependency of the student if the student does not sign a release. If the parent provides
documentation, the academic advisor and/or instructor will be notified.
• An appointment to review the record will be set with the Registrar/Director of the
Office or with the Associate Vice‐President for Academic Affairs within 45 days of the date the University
received the request.
• If the student believes that inaccurate or misleading information is contained in the educational record, or
that the information is in violation of the student’s rights of privacy, the student may submit a written request
to the administrator of the office responsible for that record. The written request submitted should include the
part of the record that is believed to need change and why it is believed the information is inaccurate,
misleading, or in violation. The university will investigate the request and notify the student of the decision. If
the record is not amended as requested, the student has the right to request a hearing.
Institutions may disclose information on a student without violating FERPA if they have designated the
information as “directory information.” At Avila University, this includes:
1. Verification of enrollment status including full‐time, part‐time, graduate, undergraduate, and
classification.
2. Student name, major and minor fields of study, academic honors, and degrees.
3. Student address and telephone numbers (only in connection with campus events and to persons
with legitimate reason).
4. Student email address (only available to authorized users of the Avila University email system).
5. Dates of attendance.
6. Participation in campus activities and sports.
7. Weight and height of members of athletic teams.
8. Most recent education agency or institution attended and hometown.
9. Student photograph.
Students have the right to “opt out” of providing directory information. Requests to limit the release
of directory information must be provided in writing to the Registration and Student Records Office by
the end of the second week of each semester. Institutions may disclose non‐directory information
without violating FERPA under the following conditions:
• with the student’s written request;
• to school officials with “legitimate educational interests;”
• to parents of dependent students;
• to a person in response to a lawfully issued subpoena or court order.
For questions regarding FERPA, please contact the Registrar or the Academic Affairs Office. Students have the right to
file a complaint with the U.S. Department of Education concerning alleged failures by the University to comply with the
requirements of FERPA.
The name and address of the Office that administers FERPA is:
Family Policy Compliance Office
U.S. Department of Education, 400 Maryland Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20202‐4605

FIRE SAFETY EQUIPMENT
Tampering with fire equipment, elevator alarm bells, and fire exit doors and signs places everyone at risk and will result
in serious disciplinary action for any party found engaging in such actions. In addition, pulling a false fire alarm is a
violation of state and federal law and will be treated as such. Anyone found to be responsible for a false alarm will be
subject to University disciplinary action and referral to local authorities.

33

FIREWORKS / EXPLOSIVES
Possession or use of fireworks and/or other explosives on University property is strictly prohibited.

GAMBLING
Gambling is prohibited on the Avila University campus in compliance with Missouri state law. As defined by the
Missouri state law, a person engages in " gambling " when he/she stakes or risks something of value upon the outcome
of a contest of chance, or a future event not under his/her control or influence, or upon an agreement or
understanding that he/she will receive something of value in the event of a certain outcome.

GUEST SPEAKER / PERFORMER POLICY FOR CO‐CURRICULAR PROGRAMS
Avila University is committed to an objective search for truth. A healthy dialogue among the campus community is
fostered as varying viewpoints and ideas are freely presented. The University encourages recognized campus
organizations to invite speakers from the community to participate in this ongoing dialogue and search for truth.
Speakers/performers whose topic and manner of delivery are consistent with the mission and values of Avila University
are welcome on campus. Invitations to guest speakers/performers are subject to the approval of the provost and/or
assistant vice president of student development and success.

HAZING
Hazing of individuals as members or prospective members of any campus entity shall not be tolerated.
Campus entities include any group of persons operating under the name Avila University as employees, students,
alumni, friends, or other association. They include, but are not limited to, staff or faculty groups, residence hall living
units, athletic teams, fraternal Greek organizations, honorary societies, and recognized campus organizations.
Hazing activities are defined as any action taken or situation created, intentionally, whether off or on campus, to
produce mental or physical discomfort, embarrassment, harassment, or ridicule. Such activities may include, but are
not limited to the following: required use of alcohol or other drugs, paddling in any form, creation of excessive fatigue,
physical or psychological shocks, wearing of public apparel which is conspicuous and not normally in good taste,
engaging in public stunts and buffoonery, morally degrading or humiliating games, and any other activities which are
not consistent with the Avila University Values Policy or regulations.

IDENTIFICATION CARD (ID)
All students are required to have an official, validated Avila University ID card. Students shall present their ID card upon
request of an authorized official for services, admittance to activities, events, and the use of some facilities. ID cards are
required for students on meal plans to access food service and for resident students to gain access to the residence
halls. Resident students must have their valid ID at all times. Some local businesses grant discounts to students who
present a valid ID. Replacement ID cards are available at a cost of $20, due at the time of card replacement. For more
information or a schedule of times for ID service, contact the campus safety office.

INFORMATION DISSEMINATION
See POSTING POLICY

34

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
The primary purpose of the information technology system on the Avila University campus is for educational related
activities. Members of the Avila community must adhere to the following:
System Integrity
1. Ultimate responsibility for proper use and misuse of the system (including all computers, software, related
equipment, and the network) lies with each individual user.
2. Actions taken by users that deliberately deny authorized persons access to any aspect of the system are prohibited.
3. Actions taken by users that interfere with or alter the integrity of the University’s equipment or software are
prohibited.
4. Intentional actions taken by users that place onto any Avila equipment any icons, screensavers or items of a nature
that would be considered offensive are prohibited.
Privacy and No Harassment
1. Students are required to respect others’ right to privacy in the electronic forum. Avila University prohibits users of
University technology, including computers and users of personally owned computers linked via University
telecommunications equipment to other systems, from violating such rights. This includes, but is not limited to,
attempts to read another person’s electronic mail, to access another’s files, to access electronic records containing
information concerning another person, use of another person’s e‐mail account, and use of another person’s password.
2. Accounts are not to be shared by multiple users.
3. Fraudulent, harassing, nuisance, threatening, offensive or obscene messages and/or materials are not to be
displayed, sent with or stored onto any Avila equipment, or displayed with private equipment in any public forum.
4. This policy does not prohibit Avila University from monitoring users of University technology. Users should have no
expectation of privacy in Avila owned equipment or technology.
Copyright Observance
1. Avila University purchases or licenses the use of copies of computer software from a variety of outside companies.
The University does not own the copyright to this software or its related documentation. Users may not reproduce any
portion for use on another computer without permission from information and technology services. Permission is
granted only if it complies with the University’s licensing or receives permission from the software developer.
2. Copyright with regards to traditional written materials applies to works in electronic forms. Users must comply with
all copyright rules and regulations according to the U.S. Copyright Law.
3. Software may not be loaded and/or saved onto any Avila University equipment without written permission from the
director of information and technology services.
4. Observances or other information regarding misuse of software or related documentation must be reported to the
assistant vice president of student development and success.
Courtesy
1. Users must observe basic technology courtesy with regards to other users. This includes, but is not limited to,
refraining from excessive use of paper, refraining from making electronic mass mailings for non‐University business use,
and refraining from using University owned computers or other technology for personal monetary gain.
2. The primary purpose of University‐owned computers on the campus is for educational purposes. Users needing the
computers for academic purposes will have priority over users playing games, in chat rooms, sending personal e‐mails,
or other personal uses.
Enforcement
Avila University may monitor and record usage of network resources. Information gained in this way may be used in
disciplinary and/or criminal proceedings. Violations of this policy will be reported to the assistant vice president of
student development and success. The above listed items of prescribed conduct are not intended to be all‐inclusive.
Any behavior that is contrary to the ethical use of Avila computer technology will be subject to disciplinary action.

35

MISSING RESIDENT STUDENT POLICY
Current residents of campus housing have the option to identify an individual to be contacted by the institution after it
is determined that the student is missing according to procedures identified below.
Each student should register emergency contact information with the Student Life Office.
If upon consultation with law enforcement, it is determined that the student has been missing for more than 24 hours
and has not returned to campus, the assistant vice president of student development and success office will initiate the
emergency contact procedures in accordance with the student’s designation.
Any dependent student under the age of 18 and living in a campus housing facility is advised that the institution will
notify the appropriate custodial parent or guardian not later than 24 hours after it is determined that the student is
missing.
An appropriate law enforcement agency will be notified not later than 24 hours after the time it is determined that the
resident student under the age of 18 is missing.
Official notification procedures
Official notification of a missing student will originate from the Campus Safety Office in conjunction with the Office of
Marketing and Communication and the Assistant Vice President of Student Development and Success Office.
Any report relating any missing student or any such student determined to be missing must be referred immediately to
the Campus Safety Office.
1. Official receiving a complaint of a missing student will immediately contact the Campus Safety
Supervisor on duty.
2. The responding supervisor will gather all information regarding the person. General descriptions, clothes last
worn, where subject might be, who they might be with, vehicle description, for example, are items to share.
3. Supervisor obtains information from the card access information, dining services, and residence life to
ascertain more information. Residence Life will conduct a room search in accordance with their procedures.
4. The Supervisor will also contact the coordinator of the Care Team to gather information regarding the
missing person’s well‐being and physical state.
5. Appropriate campus personnel will be enlisted to aid in the search for the missing person.
6. Class schedules will be obtained and a search of the classrooms will be conducted at that time and at the
time of the classes.
7. Information ascertained from the above will be referred to the Assistant Vice President of Student
Development and Success Office for consultation with other offices including the Office of Marketing and
Communication.
If the above are unsuccessful in locating the person or it is apparent from the beginning that the person is
missing, the investigation will be turned over to the appropriate local law enforcement agency. At this time, they
become the authority in charge and the Campus Safety Department will assist them in any way necessary.
The assistant vice president of student development and success or their designee will be responsible for the
continuing communicating with the family or guardian of the missing person until the missing person is found or when
law enforcement officials end their search.

MISSING PERSON (NON‐RESIDENT) POLICY
Any report relating any person who is not a resident student and determined to be missing must be referred
immediately to the Campus Safety Office.
1. Official receiving a complaint of a missing person will immediately contact the Campus Safety
Supervisor on duty, or notify emergency services at 9‐911 from any campus phone, or 911 from any cellular
phone.

36

2. Campus Safety Supervisor will contact emergency services and inform of the situation. Supervisor follows all
directions from emergency services. Campus Safety will assist emergency services in any way necessary.
3. Campus Safety may gather information similar to the procedure used as outlined for Resident Students to
aid in a missing person’s search.

PARKING
Overview
The parking policy is intended to provide reasonable access to parking for Avila‘s faculty, staff, students, and visitors.
Parking regulations are needed to facilitate traffic flow, control parking, protect emergency vehicle access, and reserve
certain critical areas for special use. The following regulations apply to anyone that uses any type of motor vehicle on
campus, whether a member of the Avila community or a guest/vendor on our campus. If you have any questions
concerning the following regulations or procedures, please contact the campus safety office.
Registration of Vehicles
All members of the Avila University community must register their vehicles with the campus safety office if they plan on
parking a vehicle on campus property. A parking sticker will be provided to those that register their vehicles. A valid
Avila University parking sticker must be displayed on the vehicle when it is on campus property.
Parking stickers are to be displayed on the rear windshield, lower left corner (behind the driver). Failure to register
one‘s vehicle or failure to display the appropriately assigned sticker will result in a parking citation, an additional $40
fine, possible revocation of parking privileges, and possible towing of the vehicle from the campus property. Additional
and replacement stickers are available in the campus safety office with a fee of $5 applied.
All students must re‐register their vehicle every academic year to receive the proper year’s resident parking sticker.
Visitors
Any person who is not currently a member of the Avila University faculty, staff, or student body is a
Visitor. Visitors to the campus may park in the designated visitor spaces or, if none are available, use any parking spaces
on campus that are not restricted. Visitors will be held to the same parking regulations as community members.
Parking Registration Fee
There is not a registration fee to park on campus. One sticker will be given to each student free of charge.
Driving on Campus
The maximum speed limit is 15 mph assuming the vehicle is operated in a safe and controlled manner.
Driving is permitted only on designated, surfaced drives. No vehicles are allowed on grass, lawns, or fields without
special permission.
Parking Spaces
Vehicles should only be parked in spaces clearly marked as valid parking spots. Parking along curbs, unless clearly
marked as a parking space, is a violation. Parking across more than one spot is a violation, regardless of the location of
other cars in the lot. Reserved parking spaces can only be used for the posted purpose and only by those for whom the
space is intended. Designated times for use on certain spaces may also be posted and will be enforced.
Loading and unloading spaces have been designated and so marked. Some of these areas can be used for specific
amounts of time and must be vacated after the time period has elapsed; use of these areas for any other reason is
strictly prohibited and can result in citation and/or immediate towing of the vehicle.
Use of emergency flashers does not justify parking in violation of regulations and is not an appropriate cause for
appeal.

37

Condition / Abandonment of Vehicles
All vehicles parked on the campus must be registered with the appropriate state licensing office. All vehicles must
display a valid license plate and registration sticker. The vehicle must be maintained in a drivable condition. Vehicles
that are abandoned or left unmoved for an extended period of time or are left in a dilapidated state of condition may
be towed from the campus. If the vehicle is registered on campus, Campus Safety will attempt to contact the owner
and give a reasonable amount of time to have the vehicle repaired and/or removed from campus.
Handicap Spaces
Certain spaces on campus are reserved for those needing closer access to campus buildings due to a temporary or
permanent disability. People requiring permanent handicap parking privileges will need to display a state issued
handicapped license plate or parking tag.
Vehicles illegally parked in a handicap spot will be cited, fined, and may be immediately towed from campus.
Explanation of Restrictions
Employee Reserved Parking
Designated areas have been designated as employee only due to high demands from faculty or staff whose
teaching course content necessitates close proximity to the core of campus.
Future Eagle Parking
Designated Admissions parking only and assigned by the Office of Admissions
Reserved Parking
Campus Safety may reserve certain areas for events or visitor parking. F/S/C/R parking in these areas may be
ticketed. In extreme instances, violators may be towed.
No Overnight Parking
Parking in lots designated as “No Overnight Parking” are designated to promote areas that are clear during the
overnight hours. This promotes safety by consolidating overnight parking into designated areas. Overnight is defined as
after events or classes are finished for the evening. Hours are variable. During snow events, these parking areas may be
declared to promote snow clearing for the University.
Resident Parking
Areas have been designated as “Resident Parking” to facilitate the residents to find a home for their vehicles at all
times. Residents are only allowed to park in these areas on campus. Special permits are available to park in these areas
after August 1 and expire July 31. Upon departing the residence halls, but remaining an Avila student, the permit must
be surrendered to Campus Safety or evidence given that the parking permit was destroyed. These areas are reserved
for current residents only.
Summer Resident Parking
Parking for Resident Students during the summer is only allowed for students living in the residence halls during the
summer sessions. No long term parking is available for students wishing to leave their cars on campus during the
summer.
Thirty Minute Parking
Parking spaces designated “30 Minute Parking” are implemented as designated drop‐off or pick‐up locations for
individuals needing closer access to a building. These are open access spaced able to be used by all of the community
for a brief period of time.
Explanation of Parking Citations
Standard Fine = $40
Vehicle has NO VALID PARKING PERMIT
● Vehicle has no parking permit or the permit is not displayed properly.
● Standard Fine
Parked in DISABLED PERSONS’ space/area

38

● Vehicle has parked in a disabled person’s spot without proper authorization displayed
● $200 Fine
Parked in NO PARKING space/area
● Vehicle has parked in an area designed as “No Parking.” This cita on would also include parking overnight in
an overnight parking area. Grassy areas not otherwise designated as parking are considered no parking.
● Standard Fine
Parked in RESERVED or DESIGNATED space/area
● Improperly parked in a designated reserved area or in a temporarily designated reserved area.
● Standard Fine
Parked in 2 SPACES
● Vehicle has parked in more than one space not allowing another vehicle to park next to them.
● Standard Fine
Blocking driveway or access
● Vehicle has parked so that access to a normally accessible area is not allowed. Will also be used to mark
abuse of a 30‐minute parking spot.
● Standard Fine
Enforcement Details
1. Tickets
a. First Ticket – Fine
b. Second Ticket – Fine
c. Third Ticket – Fine & Referral to Assistant vice president of student development and success
Office,
a. Disciplinary Sanction
d. Fourth Ticket – Fine & Referral to Assistant vice president of student development and success
b. Office, Tire Booting or Towing, Increased Disciplinary Sanctions up to Suspension Avila University
2. Ticket counts, but not the fines associated with the tickets, restart every academic year.
3. Tickets received by staff or faculty will be referred to the appropriate department on campus.
4. The Disciplinary Process, Sanctions, and the Levels associated with them begin on page 13 of the Student
Handbook.
Unpaid fines will be treated as any other unpaid balance on a student’s bill and may result in an administrative hold
and/or submittal of the balance into the collection process.
Payment Details
Payment of parking tickets can occur at the business office during normal business hours.
Tire‐Lock / Booting
Vehicles incurring four or more parking citations or repeatedly failing to acquire and display a proper parking permit for
Avila University, may have a tire boot applied to their vehicle. The vehicle will be immobilized rather than towing off of
Avila property. Removal of the boot is a $100 cash fee due in full plus payment of all prior vehicle citations before
removal of the boot. Vehicles may be towed from property if the tire boot is not removed within 24 hours.
Towing Policy
The decision to tow a vehicle will not be taken lightly. In most cases Campus Safety will make every effort to contact
the owner/operator in an attempt to get the vehicle moved prior to towing.
The university reserves the right to remove motor vehicles at the vehicle owner's expense for any of, but not limited to
the following:
1. Vehicles incurring four or more parking citations .
2. Vehicles parked in no parking areas that are impeding traffic or pedestrians.
3. Vehicles blocking legally parked vehicles.
4. Vehicles that pose hazards or are impeding necessary maintenance (e.g. blocking a fire lane, snow

39

removal, repaving, crossing a barrier, etc.)
5. Vehicles that are displaying a permit that has been reported as lost, stolen or altered.
6. Vehicles parked in disabled parking spaces without the proper permits.
7. Vehicles parked on unpaved areas.
8. Vehicles parked in tow zones.
Parking Appeal Process
Appeals for parking violations need to be made within five business days of the issued citation. Appeals received after
five days will not be considered and the fine amount will automatically be added to the student bill. An appeal form is
available in the campus safety office and must be returned to that office within the five business days. The appeal must
explain why the ticket should be voided and offer any evidence in support. Consequences for the ticket will be
suspended until the appeal is considered. If the citation is deemed justified, the fine will be added to the student bill.
Appeals will be reviewed as soon as reasonably possible by an appeals board dependent upon the availability of those
members. At certain times of the year when the appeals board is not readily available, the director of campus safety or
their designee will act in lieu of the appeals board. The decision to tow a vehicle from the campus property cannot be
appealed.
Referral to assistant vice president of student development and success office
Flagrant Parking Violations
In the case of flagrant parking violations or a referral to the assistant vice president of student development and
success office, the assistant vice president of student development and success, or his/her designee, reserves the right
to supplement the above sanctions with sanctions available in the
Student Code of Conduct including and up to revocation of parking privileges, suspension, and/or dismissal from the
institution. Local police authorities may be involved, if necessary, depending on the circumstances of the violation.
Record Keeping
The campus safety office keeps a record of all registered vehicles and any associated citations. All
Registered vehicles will have their violation total reset to zero at the beginning of each academic year unless parking
privileges were revoked for a period of time extending across multiple academic years.
Bike Parking Permits
Bike permits are available from the Campus Safety office. Permits should be affixed to the main body of the bike easily
visible.
Motorcycle Parking Permits
Motorcycle permits are available from the Campus Safety office. Permits should be affixed to the driver’s side mirror or
to an approved place on the license place of the vehicle. Motorcycle riders as well as any rider of a motorized two
wheel vehicle should affix the permit to the outside of the driver’s side rear view mirror. Motorcycle riders should
follow DOT regulations and suggestions in parking in the parking lots.

PERSONAL PROPERTY LOSSES
The University is not responsible for the loss or damage to property owned by students or their guests, regardless of
the cause.

POSTING POLICY
Students and student organizations are encouraged to have notices and promotional materials concerning items of
interest to the entire community posted on campus. As with all actions on campus that affect the entire community,

40

procedures on how this can best be accomplished in a community setting must be followed. This policy exists in order
to maximize limited bulletin board space on campus, to facilitate fair usage, to better communicate with the campus
community, and to maintain a safe and aesthetically pleasing environment. The Student Life office will administer this
posting policy in conjunction with the Office of Student Activities. The following procedures must be followed when
posting items on campus.
● Bring your signs to the Student Life office in the Marian Center. The number of signs needed will be decided
each year and communicated to those interested. The maximum size sign allowed to be submitted is 14’’ x 22.’’
If the signs are approved, they will be posted on all general use student life bulletin boards, kiosks, or other
areas so designated by the Student Life office. That office maintains a listing of the locations where signs will
be posted.
● The Student Life office will be responsible for posting and removing the signs, once the event/meeting has
occurred.
● Signs need to include, at the very least, the name of the person or organiza on responsible for the sign, and
the name, date, time, and location of the event. It is recommended that information describing the event also
be included.
● All pos ng and promo onal materials must be in good taste and within the le er and spirit of the Avila
Mission, Values, and Student Code of Conduct. In no manner can publicity emphasize or promote the sale,
distribution, or consumption of alcohol or drugs, nor depict the use of alcoholic beverages or drugs.
● The Student Life office is responsible for approving postings on campus and will notify the appropriate
individual if the signs are unacceptable.
● If acceptable, the Student Life office will post the signs as soon as possible but no earlier than two weeks
prior to the event.
● Signs not approved will be removed and discarded. Individuals and/or organiza ons viola ng this policy will
be sanctioned per the discipline system as defined in the Student Handbook.
● Pos ngs may only occur on appropriate, general pos ng, student life bulle n boards or on other authorized
areas so designated by the Student Life office. Signs posted on all other surfaces will be removed. This includes,
but is not exclusive to signs posted on doors, windows, walls, fences, other bulletin boards, etc. Posting signs
on departmental bulletin boards is regulated by that specific department and should be cleared through the
appropriate departmental office.
● Oﬀ‐campus persons and organizations may petition the Student Life Office to have signs posted on Student
Life areas. This decision is totally within the discretion of the assistant vice president of student development
and success.
● Pos ngs in the residence halls is regulated by the housing staff. If you would like signs posted in the
residence halls, please add 19 additional copies to those that you leave with the Student Life office.
Please contact the appropriate resident coordinator or director of student life concerning any other posting
issues in the residence halls.
● Pos ngs of a larger nature (banners and sheet signs) also need to be approved by the Student Life office.
If approved, possible locations will be designated by that office and the manner of hanging the sign will be
discussed with the interested parties.
● Courtesy and respect for the freedom of expression by others dictates that poster/signs should not be
marked on, destroyed or removed, except through appropriately approved channels. Anyone discovered
defacing posters would be subject to disciplinary action through the Student Code of Conduct.
● Handbills or ﬂiers may not be placed on car windshields. The Student Life office reserves the right to regulate
locations on campus where handbills and fliers may be distributed.
● Any other type of promo onal or informa onal media display not covered by the above pos ng policy
guidelines must be approved by the Student Life office prior to displaying on campus.

REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER INFORMATION
The Missouri Sex Offender Registry can be access through the Missouri State Highway Patrol’s website.

41

Registered sex offenders throughout the state are posted along with their name, address, date of birth and photo to
identify the offender. Information about the offense is also available.
www.MSHP.DPS.MISSOURI.GOV
Please feel free to call the hotline number if you have questions about the offenders in your area.
1‐888‐767‐6747
Telephone numbers for information on registered sex offenders by county are:
o Jackson County sexual offender data is (816) 524‐4302.
o Platte County sexual offender data is (816) 858‐2424.
o Cass County sexual offender data is (816) 380‐5200.
o Clay County sexual offender data is (816) 792‐7614.
To search for offenders anywhere in the United States, try searching the National Sex Offender Registry at:
www.nsopr.gov

RETALIATION
Retaliation is contrary to Avila’s mission and values and will result in discipline up to and including termination for
employees and dismissal for students. Anyone who feels that retaliatory action has been taken because of his or her
report or assistance in making a complaint should immediately bring the matter to the University’s attention.

SALES AND SOLICITATION
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of selling or advertising services, activities, goods, take
orders or make contracts for purchase or delivery, sell or offer for sale tickets, goods, activities or services, solicit funds,
subscriptions, or orders for any purpose within the boundaries of Avila University without the written consent of the
assistant vice president of student development and success and/or vice president for enrollment.
Recognized campus organizations and individual students may request permission from the director of student life to
allow for the sale of goods and services or solicitation of funds. Permission may be granted provided that advertising
and activities are planned and approved in advance, and that the financial arrangements have been made and
coordinated in the Student Life office.

SMOKING
See TOBACCO POLICY

SUBSTANCE ABUSE
See ALCOHOL AND DRUG POLICY

TELEPHONE USE
Inappropriate use of the campus telephone system will not be tolerated. It is against Avila University policy and criminal
statutes to defraud or attempt to defraud the telephone company. It is also against Avila policy and potentially against
criminal statutes to use the telephone equipment for:
● placing any anonymous calls in a manner, which could reasonably be expected to annoy, abuse, torment,
harass, or embarrass any person.
● cursing at, abusing another, or using profane, obscene, indecent, or vulgar language
● threatening to commit a crime against any person.

42

Students who receive annoying or obscene phone calls should notify the residence coordinator and/or the
director of student life immediately. Students are responsible for all phone calls made from their residence hall
rooms, regardless of the person placing the call.

THEFT
Taking or damaging property that belongs to others or belongs to Avila University is always inappropriate and not
tolerated. The act of theft may lead to dismissal from the residence halls and/or campus, per the Student Code of
Conduct. Resident students should report thefts, no matter how small, to hall staff. Commuter students should report
thefts to the campus safety office (x2950 or x2425). Avila University is not responsible for loss, damage or theft of
property.

THREATENING, HARMFUL OR INTIMIDATING BEHAVIOR
Avila University strives to maintain a peaceful environment. Further, in the spirit of the Sisters of Saint Joseph of
Carondelet, the Avila University community commits itself to liberation from violence by the promotion of right
relationships within community, with the dear neighbor, and with all creation. In this spirit, students are expected to
act in a controlled, safe, and orderly manner at all times. Any type of threatening, violent, or disorderly behavior (verbal
or nonverbal) on the part of students will not be tolerated. This includes students who endanger the property or well‐
being of others or self. Action which disrupts or tends to disrupt teaching, research, administration, disciplinary
proceedings, or other University activities on or off University premises or which endangers or tends to endanger the
safety, health, or life of a person, including but not limited to: physical or verbal abuse of any person or disorderly
conduct, loud, indecent or obscene conduct

TOBACCO POLICY
Smoking, and the use of any tobacco and cannabis products (“chew”, hookah or smoke vapors, juul) are prohibited in
all buildings on campus including outdoor facilities. Members of the Avila community and their guests must exercise
courtesy at all times in the use of smoking and smokeless tobacco products.

VANDALISM / DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY
Vandalism is considered a serious offense and will not be tolerated.
Vandalism may include the following:
1. Inciting to action or participating in unauthorized activities resulting in destruction of property
2. Tampering with telephone, vending machines, or laundry facilities or causing destruction of any form on
campus
3. Damaging or destroying property in rooms, residence halls, dining hall, or other University facilities
4. Removing, damaging or destroying posters, advertisements or signs on campus
Those found in violation of the Vandalism Policy will be billed for cleaning and repair or replacement of damaged
property. In addition, the student will be subject to disciplinary action. Members of individual residence floors or
residence hall buildings may be assessed cleaning fees or damage charges if those who are responsible do not come
forward, or are not turned in as the persons responsible.

WEAPONS / HAZARDOUS ITEMS
Avila University is an institution of higher education located on private property that forbids concealed carry or
possession of weapons on University property. This is in compliance of Missouri statute 571.030.

43

Firearms, knives longer than 3 inches, swords, arrows, or any weapons or hazardous materials, or any item resembling
a weapon (including Nerf Guns) are strictly forbidden. Possession of any of these items at a University sponsored event,
whether on or off campus, is also prohibited.
If you are uncertain about whether an item you possess is in violation of this policy you should inquire with Campus
Safety prior to bringing the item on campus. Any object used or threaten to be used to cause bodily harm can be
classified as a weapon and may fall under additional disciplinary actions.

OTHER UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Note: Please refer to the Avila University Online Catalog for the following:
 Academic Advising
 Academic Policies
 Academic Honesty
 Academic Honors
 Academic Program Information
 Admission Procedures
 Application for Degree
 Class Attendance
 Course Numbering System
 Credit Hours and Grading System
 Degree Requirements
 Exceptions to Academic Policies
 Financial Aid Processes
 Financial Regulations
 Grade Reports
 Participation in Commencement
 Permission to Attend Another College
 Placement Examinations
 Probation and Dismissal
 Procedure for Grade Appeal
 Program Changes and Withdrawals
 Registration
 Release of Student Information
 Repeated Coursework
 Student Load and Classification
 Student Responsibility for Degree Completion
 Transcripts
 Transfer of Credit
 Undergraduate Programs/Courses

V. RESIDENCE LIFE ‐ GENERAL INFORMATION

44

THE RESIDENCE LIFE STAFF
Resident Assistants (RAs) are students who have been carefully selected and trained to assist you in making the
residence halls a positive living environment. The RAs are responsible for community building, educational and social
programming, policy enforcement, and peer mentorship. Your RA is a source of information and support and a great
listener.
Assistant Vice President of Student Development and Success is a staff member who is responsible for the daily
management of the residence hall complex. The AVP serves as a resource and is helpful in addressing any concerns you
may have about living in the residence halls. Residence Life Specialists are full time professional faculty or staff that live
on campus and manage Residence Life in the evening and on weekends.
Residence Life Graduate Assistants/Head Resident Assistant (GA & HRA) work with the student staff and resident
students to attain and maintain a positive community environment in the residence halls.
Resident Assistants Duty Phone: 816.256.6197
Residence Life Office: 105 Carondelet Hall x3748
Here you will find the Graduate Assistants and the Director of Housing.
The BASICS
Some of the things you might want to know.
What is my mailing address?
Mail is delivered to the campus daily except Saturday, Sunday and holidays. Mail is distributed to your mailbox by the
front desk generally by 5 pm each day. Your mailbox combination code is handed out by your RA in the first floor
meeting. If you lose or forget your mailbox combination or have difficulty accessing your mailbox with the code
provided, contact your RA for assistance. Your new mailing address is:
Your Name
Room Number and Residence Hall
11901 Wornall Road
Kansas City, MO 64145
Outgoing mailbox is in outside the dining hall. Stamps may be purchased from the Bookstore.

ADDITIONAL RESIDENCE HALL FACILITIES AND SERVICES
Telephones
Local and on‐campus telephone service is provided at no cost to you upon your request. Residents must provide their
own touch‐tone phone.
Kitchens
Each building is equipped with kitchen areas. Residents must observe any posted kitchen policies. Garbage disposals
are provided in the kitchens for food disposal. Food disposal is not permitted in bathroom or laundry room sinks or
drains. All residents are responsible for cleaning the kitchens after use.
Laundry Facilities
Laundry facilities are located in each building.
Lounges

45

Each floor has a lounge for student use. The lounge furniture is provided for use in the lounges only and cannot be
removed.
Storage
Summer storage is not available. Any personal items remaining after the hall closing will be immediately discarded.
Vending Machines
Snack and drink vending machines are located in the 24‐hour access areas for each building.
Wireless Access
For students with their own computers, wireless access is available in all the residence halls.
Safety in the Halls
The degree of safety in residence halls depends on residents taking responsibility for their own safety.
A safe community requires all members to be alert and observe basic safety precautions.
Please review the safety tips and instructions in the following section.
TOP 10 SAFETY TIPS
1. ALWAYS lock your door!
2. NEVER prop open exterior building doors.
3. Report all suspicious activity or persons to hall staff or the campus safety office.
4. Use the buddy system when going out at night.
5. Tell somebody where you are going and call when you arrive at your destination.
6. NEVER let a stranger into the building. If they are really here to see somebody, that person will meet them to
let them in.
7. Report any missing items to your hall staff immediately.
8. Your RA can help with security questions.
9. In case of an emergency, call 911 and then campus safety cell phone at 816.985.6079.
10. ALWAYS think about how your actions might impact the community.
Avila Alerts Text Messages
Avila University has created a text message alert service as one method by which members of the Avila community may
be contacted in the event of an emergency.
Dangerous Weather
From time to time, hazardous weather conditions develop in the Kansas City area. Should the campus civil defense
sirens sound, seek shelter immediately. The residence life staff will be working to evacuate the building. Keep noise to a
minimum, and listen for directions from a safety shift supervisor. The sirens are tested the first Wednesday of every
month at 11 am. Do not confuse this test with an actual emergency.
Fire Safety
If you discover a fire:
● Pull the nearest alarm pull sta on.
● No fy residence hall staﬀ immediately of the ﬁre loca on.
When the Fire Alarm Sounds:
● Leave the building immediately.
● Close all doors behind you as you exit.
● Walk, DO NOT RUN as you exit the building.
● Stand clear of the building a er evacua ng.
● Do not re‐enter the building until you are instructed to do so by residence hall staff or fire safety professionals.

46

Fire Safety Tips:
● Do not open the door if the doorknob is hot.
● If you cannot leave the room, go to the window and signal for help.
● If there is smoke, keep low to the ﬂoor.
● DO NOT a empt to ﬁght the ﬁre when the alarm has sounded, evacuate the building.
For your own protection, obey fire regulations. Failure to evacuate when the alarm sounds will result in disciplinary
action.
Illness or Injury
In case of accident or illness:
● Inform a residence hall staﬀ member.
● Contact health services, Student Success Center in Hodes, 501.3668
● In an emergency call 9.911.
● If ambulance transport is required, you will be transported to the nearest medical facility (St. Joseph
Health Center). You will be responsible for ambulance and medical charges.

The Residence Hall Contract
Contract Terms
The Residence Hall and Food Service Contract, which you signed, is in effect for one full academic year, consisting of fall
and spring semesters. All individuals living in a campus residence hall must be enrolled as a student at Avila University.
The contract does not cover room and board for the Thanksgiving break, semester break, Spring break, or summer
break. Students interested in housing during these periods will need to contract separately.
Contract Termination
Students can only be released from their housing contract under a few specific circumstances. Permission to cancel the
contract must be obtained from the Housing Exemptions Committee. The Housing Exemptions Committee meets once
a month from October through August. Refer to your Residence Hall and Food Service Contract for further details
regarding contract termination.
Residence Hall Procedures
Avila University Residence Life strives to provide an environment, which is safe, feels comfortable, and supports the
academic mission of the University. The procedures listed below serve as guidelines for you as a resident and a member
of the University community.
Check‐In and Check‐Out Procedures
All residents must complete a “Room Condition Report” form with their RA at check‐in. Complete the form thoroughly
with time taken to document concerns regarding the move‐in condition of your room. Your hall staff will provide
guidance in completing this form.
Check‐out procedures will be posted prior to final exams. To check‐out of your room you must schedule a time with a
residence life staff member. All residents must follow formal check‐in and check‐out procedures. Failure to follow
check‐in or check‐out procedures will result in additional charges.
Lock Outs
Each resident is expected to carry his/her key and door access card at all times. Students who are locked out of their
room may call the RA duty phone at 816.256.6197. A fee will apply to residents with excessive lock outs during the
year. If you lose your key, you may obtain a temporary key from the residence life staff.

47

Temporary keys are for 24‐hour use after which time, if you have not found your key and returned the temporary key,
you will be charged a fee of $50 to replace your lock and produce new keys for your room.
Maintenance
If something needs repaired in your room, please send an email to the director of residence life. Be sure to note your
name and room number in your email and write a detailed description of the issue you are reporting. Report
emergency repairs directly to the on‐duty RA at 816.256.6197.
Residency Requirement
Avila University believes in its responsibility to ensure that each new student is given maximum opportunity to succeed
academically, developmentally and socially. This can best be accomplished through a total integration of the
University’s environment and residence on campus. Therefore, all full‐time, single first‐year and sophomore students
under the age of 21 are required to live in the University residence halls if they are not residing with parents or legal
guardians within a commutable distance from campus. Contact the Housing office for further information or exceptions
to this policy. Housing is available to part‐time students pending availability and approval of the Vice President for
Student Affairs.
Room Changes
Room assignments are intended for the entire academic year. Room/roommate changes are considered on an
individual basis. If you would like to discuss the possibility of making a room/roommate change, you must first meet
with your RA to discuss your situation and attempt roommate reconciliation.

VI. RESIDENCE LIFE POLICIES
Every community has basic guidelines in which all members are expected to live cooperatively. The residence hall
setting presents a special situation where students are living in close contact with each other on a daily basis. In this
special situation, it is most important that all residents respect the rights and privileges of others.
A resident student is a member of both the campus residential community and the overall University community. With
the additional privileges afforded to resident students are accompanying responsibilities. The policies listed here, in
addition to all general University policies, serve as a guideline for you as a member of the campus residential
community. These policies are not, and cannot, be considered all‐inclusive—any issue not specifically covered will be
addressed as necessary in congruence with the Avila University Mission and Values statements.

BUILDING SECURITY
Any action seen as compromising the safety of the hall and its residents will be viewed as a serious violation of Avila
University policy. Examples can include allowing entry of non‐residents; propping, damaging or tampering with exterior
doors; and giving keys and/or access cards to non‐residents. Each resident is responsible for taking part in the security
of the residence hall.

BUNK BEDS / LOFTS
Hand‐constructed lofts are not permitted in the residence halls due to safety concerns.
Avila University furniture that can be lofted or bunked must be done so safely using appropriate materials. Pins to bunk
or loft beds are available from the hall staff. Placing lofted or bunked beds in front of the windows is prohibited.
Questions about proper placement may be referred to the hall staff.

48

CHILDCARE
Childcare is not permitted in the residence halls. Children under the age of 12 are not permitted in the residence halls
past Quiet Hours.

COOKING APPLIANCES
Due to concerns for fire and safety standards, only microwaves, automatic coffee makers, and "dorm‐size" refrigerators
(5.5 cubic feet or less) may be used in resident rooms. Each building is equipped with a kitchen area for student use. To
prevent fires, cooking appliances must always be attended while in use. No toasters, toaster ovens, crock pots, or air
fryers are allowed in Residence Halls.

DAMAGES
Damages to the residence hall should be reported to your RA or other hall staff immediately. All rooms are inspected
prior to occupancy and again when you vacate the room. Any damage will be charged to the room occupants. If the
responsible party cannot be identified, both occupants will share the charge.
In the event of damages to common areas, residents of that floor or building will be held responsible if the responsible
party cannot be identified.

ELEVATOR MISUSE
Damages or break down of an elevator due to the capacity being exceeded or mistreatment (jumping, etc.) will be
billed to the student(s).

FIRE HAZARDS
Due to the potential for fire, use of incense, candles, explosives, fireworks, gasoline, potpourri burners, and incendiary
devices of any kind are not permitted in the residence halls. Grills (including George Foreman style‐electric indoor grills)
and hibachis are not permitted inside the residence halls.

FURNITURE
Residents are responsible for all University furniture provided in their rooms. All furniture is to remain in your room.
Any damaged or missing furniture will be billed to your account. Common area furniture is for the use of all residents
and must remain in its original area. Students found to have such items in their rooms will be fined a minimum of $100
per item, and disciplinary sanctions could be assigned.

GUESTS / VISITATION
Residents are permitted to have guests in their rooms. The only people allowed to live or stay overnight in the room or
suite are those assigned to that room or guests with permission. All overnight guests must be registered and approved
the director of residence life at least 24 hours prior to their stay during office hours Monday through Friday. To register
a guest, send an email to both the director of residence life with your name, your contact phone number, your room
number, your guest’s name, your guest’s contact phone number, and the specific dates your guest will be spending the
night. Guest registration is critical in case of an emergency. All guests in the residence halls are required to have valid
photo ID or Avila ID on them at all times. Overnight guests may not stay for more than three days during any thirty‐day
period.

49

Guests are responsible for policies and residents are responsible for the behavior of their guests and can be held
responsible for their guests policy violations. Guests must be escorted at all times.

HALL SPORTS
In the interest of personal safety, sporting activities in the hallways and in individual student rooms are not permitted.
This includes, but is not limited to, bouncing, kicking, hitting or throwing balls or other objects, running, jumping or
jogging, and using equipment such as baseball bats or golf clubs. Exceptions for Residence Life sponsored programming.

INTERNET ACCESS
Each residence hall room on main campus has one active Ethernet port per resident, which allows residents to connect
to the Internet at 50 Mbps. Internet service is included in the room rate. Devices including, but not limited, to hubs,
switches, bridges, routers, wireless network access points, network firewalls, VPN concentrators, and remote access
devices are strictly prohibited.

KEYS
Each student will receive a room key. Keys are issued to residents for their personal use only. Under no circumstances
may the key be loaned or given to another person. Reproduction of a room key is strictly prohibited. Any time a student
moves out of the residence hall or changes rooms within the residence halls, all keys must be returned to an authorized
staff member for collection and verification. Returned keys are noted by the staff person on the “Room Inventory” form
for the rooms being vacated. Failure to return any key will result in a charge for replacement. Loss of a room key must
be reported to the Director immediately. See Lock Out procedure for more information.

PETS
Small fish in bowls or aquariums (maximum capacity of 10 gallons) are allowed in student rooms. No other pets are
permitted in the residence halls.

QUIET HOURS
All residents have the right to a reasonable amount of time for study and sleep. Out of respect for all residents, noise is
expected to be kept at reasonable levels 24‐hours a day.
Quiet hours are: Sunday – Thursday 10 pm – 10 am
Friday & Saturday Midnight – Noon
Noise heard outside of a closed door or within student rooms from the hallways will be considered a violation of the
quiet hours policy.
Quiet hours may be adjusted by the residence life staff as necessary and will be during finals week. Any changes will be
communicated to the residents in writing.
Courtesy hours are 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.

ROOM DECORATIONS
Students are encouraged to personalize their rooms by adding their own decorating touches. However, no permanent
changes may be made. In keeping with Avila's Mission and Value statements, the display of signs, posters, or other

50

messages that are obscene, offensive, or demeaning are not allowed. The use of nails is prohibited and use is subject to
a fine. The use of double‐sided tape and contact paper is discouraged. The use of duct tape or other materials to seal
resident room doors or doorways is prohibited. All materials and residue must be removed and cleaned from room
walls, ceiling, door and floor before checking out for the year.
Failure to comply with the above will result in damage charges and fines.

ROOM ENTRY
Avila University may enter and search any area on campus for whatever reason it deems appropriate. In most cases,
entry/search is done for the following reasons, but is not limited to these:
● Suspected viola on of University policy and/or of local, state or federal law
● Concern for life, safety, health, or property
● Inspec ons for purpose of sanita on, repair or renova on

SEXUAL MISCONDUCT
Physical contact, penetration, exposure, solicitation or request of any sexual nature, whether in public or private, is
prohibited on campus.

SMOKE DETECTORS
Residents are required to test the smoke detectors in their room on a monthly basis. Replacement batteries may be
obtained from the hall staff. Students are not to alter the smoke detector function in any way. As the malfunction of a
smoke detector places all residents at risk, students may be required to submit written verification of their monthly
detector tests.

STUDENTS NOT ASSIGNED
Students not assigned to a room on campus cannot live in the Residence Halls.

WINDOWS
Window screens must remain in the window at all times. Tossing any item from any window is strictly prohibited.

VII. ORGANIZATIONS
Getting involved in organizations and activities is an important part of the University’s total educational experience. As
a participant, you develop such skills as interpersonal communication, organization, budgeting, time management,
delegation, motivation, and the art of compromise. Avila University supports over 40 student organizations that
provide leadership and involvement opportunities for all students. If you would like further information about any of
the groups listed, please stop by the Student Life office in Marian Center or see current an organization list, brief
mission statements, and organization advisor contact information at http://www.avila.edu/campuslife/clubs.asp.

51

ORGANIZATION GUIDELINES
Membership
Campus organizations must be open to all students without regard to sex, race, religion, age, color, sexual orientation,
disability, or national origin. Active membership in recognized campus organizations is limited to members of the Avila
University community (students, faculty, staff, and administration). Voting privileges and the right to hold office are
limited to the student members of the University community. Organizations may affiliate with external organizations
whose philosophy and operations are consistent with the campus organization and the values of Avila University.
Recognition as an Official Avila University Club/Organization
When formed, the purpose and operation of campus organizations must be consistent with the philosophy of Avila
University and be approved by the vice president for student affairs
Students should seek the assistance of the director of student life in exploring possible interest in a proposed new
organization/club. If significant interest exists, students can begin the formal process to become recognized.
The formal process to become recognized as an Avila organization is as follows:
1. Create a club constitution and submit it to the director of student life. The constitution must include, at a minimum,
a statement of purpose, criteria for membership, and the club's rules and procedures.
2. Submit a list of proposed officers.
3. Identify an advisor.
4. Meet with the director of student life to obtain his/her recommendation to the Student Senate for approval as an
official recognized club.
5. Schedule a time with the Student Senate to propose the new club, and to seek their official recognition of the club.
6. The Senate will forward their recommendation to the vice president for student affairs. No club or organization is
officially recognized as an Avila organization without the final approval of the vice president for enrollment.
In order to continue to be recognized each year, campus organizations must register annually with the Student Life
office. The organization must make sure the following is updated and on file in the Student Life office:
1. A club constitution that includes, at a minimum, a statement of purpose, criteria for membership, and the club's
rules and procedures
2. The name of the current advisor and the current list of officer addresses.
3. Any student organization that fails to provide updated information within the first 45 days of the academic year will
be listed as dormant. This includes loss of all privileges listed below until information becomes current.
Recognized Student Organization Benefits
Recognized student organizations may, in compliance with University policies:
1. Use University facilities and services
2. Sponsor on‐campus fundraising events
3. Apply for funds through the Student Activity Fee Board.
4. Sponsor programs and activities under the auspices of Avila University
5. Access to supplies for student organization use (such as paper, etc. for advertising)
Loss of Recognized Club/Organization Status or Discipline
Revocation of recognized campus organization status may result if:
1. An organization strays significantly from its purpose
2. There is a mismanagement of funds
3. The organization incurs debts
4. There is misuse of facilities or services
5. A violation of policy occurs
6. Lack of participation in the Council of Presidents meetings
Recognized campus organizations are responsible for compliance with the Student Code of Conduct.

52

Infractions committed by organizations or individuals will subject both organization and individuals to possible
disciplinary action.
Council of Presidents
The Council of Presidents is comprised of the president or lead officer of each student organization and the director of
student life. The council’s purpose, among other responsibilities, is to improve communication between all
organizations and to work for the betterment of Student Life and campus activities. The council also provides a
discussion forum of campus policies and procedures concerning organizations. Throughout the academic year, each
student club/organization must be represented at each Council of Presidents meeting.
Dues
Recognized campus student organizations may charge minimal dues, if necessary, for the successful
operation of the organization. The amount of such dues must be approved by the vice president for student affairs.
Dues must be charged equally to all members of the student organization.
Advisor
Campus organizations may recommend that a member of the Avila community serve as the organization’s advisor. This
recommendation should be submitted to the Vice President for Student Affairs.
Access to Organizational Funds
Student Activity Fee Account (SAF)
1. Refer to your budget request and award letter to determine whether funds were allocated for this purpose. If you
are unable to locate your award letter, contact the Student Life office for award verification.
2. Student leader and advisor should confer to approve expenditure. The advisor signature is required on the fund
request.
3. If there is a bill to be paid, submit invoice and check request to the Student Life office to process payment.
“Check Request” forms are available at the Student Life office in Marian Center.
4. If there is a request for reimbursement, submit receipt and check request to the Student Life office. “Check
Request” forms are available at the Student Life office in the Marian Center.
Allow one week for processing of a check request. (Check requests are for $25 or more. Petty cash receipts must be
submitted for amounts less than $25.) Under normal conditions, check requests approved by the Student Life office and
submitted to the business office by 5 pm on Wednesday will be ready on Friday after 9 am. You have the option to have
the check mailed to the appropriate person/agency or to pick it up in the business office. All checks charged to the
Student Activity Fee must be approved by the assistant vice president of student development and success.
Recognized Clubs/Organizations are eligible to receive funds each year to be used toward programs and activities. This
is similar to a line of credit provided through the Student Activity Fee Account. It is important to remember that if this
funding is not used by the end of the fiscal year, June 30, unused portion is no longer available.
SAF funding must be used in accordance with the funding allocation. To use funds for a purpose not requested in your
original funding request, you must submit a “Request to Change Funding Allocation” form to the Student Activity Fee
Board. Forms are available in the Student Life office. Allow at least one week for processing.
Independent Organization Account (IOA)
The Student Life office also maintains an independent student club/organization account. This account is designed to
accommodate deposits of funds raised by clubs/organizations (including membership dues).
Money collected by clubs/organizations must be deposited into the Independent Organization Account.
This is separate from the Student Activity Fee fund. Clubs may make deposits and withdrawals of funds by contacting
the Student Life office (ext. 3754). The Student Life office acts as the treasurer of this account. The assistant vice
president of student development and success or the vice president for enrollment must sign all requests. The money

53

in this account stays in this account until it is spent, regardless of Avila’s fiscal year. Funds from the IOA account are
requested in the same manner as SAF.
Different from Student Activity Fee Fund
The Student Activity Fee allocations or "lines of credit" must reflect submitted budgets and do not carry over from one
year to another. Organizations may use IOA money in ways consistent with the philosophy and purpose of the
organization and the University. IOA funds are carried over from one year to the next.
Allocation and Spending Guidelines
Allocation and operating guidelines that the Student Activity Fee Board (SAFB) and Avila University has deemed as
appropriate:
● To receive funds, a student club or organiza on must be approved by the Student Senate and the vice president for
enrollment and student development. At any point that this recognition occurs, the club/organization is eligible to
receive the seed money that the SAFB has allocated for such entities.
● Clubs/Organiza ons, in order to receive funding, are required to par cipate in the Council of Presidents as
organized by the director of student life.
● Access for funds will be weighed in light of the requests for funds that were approved by the Student
Activity Fee Board. Organizations must make a special appeal to spend money outside of their approved
requests. (A “Request to Change Funding Allocation” form must be submitted for consideration.)
● Ac vity fee funds may be used to pay honorariums.
● Ac vity fee funds may NOT be used to pay students as a salary compensa on for du es fulﬁlled as part of co‐
curricular activities.
● Ac vity fee funds may NOT be used for food purchases over $50 for regular meetings where only minimal
members of the community benefit from this expenditure.
● Ac vity fee funds may be used to help fund par cipa on in na onal conferences or events if funds have
been requested specifically for this purpose.
● Capital outlays for equipment are reviewed on an individual basis and may be approved if the equipment is
used for programming that benefits a large portion of the student body.
Contracts
In order to protect Avila University and its student organizations from financial and technical difficulties arising from
contracts with entertainers, vendors, businesses, or other groups or persons offering services or products to students;
all contracts for student sponsored events or services must be pre‐approved and signed by the vice president of finance
and administration and the group's advisor. A copy of all contracts must be filed in the Student Life office.
Other Policies Applicable to Campus Organizations
Organizations are held to all the policies as listed in the University Policies section of this Student Handbook.
In particular, organizations should reference the policies that directly affect aspects of their operation on campus, these
include facilities and services, posting, sales and solicitation, and guest speakers and performers.

OTHER CO‐CURRICULAR OPPORTUNITIES
A musical and three dramas or comedies are presented by the theatre program each academic year. With directors
drawn from the faculty and guest professionals, Avila students have the opportunity to audition for a role, stage‐
manage a show, work in the theatre box office or production office, design and build sets or lights, sew costumes or
construct props, and all of the other numerous essentials that are part of live theatre. All students, regardless of major,
are welcome to participate in the theatre productions.
Auditions occur in late August and late November for each semester's shows and are publicized on campus prior to the
actual dates. Every student enrolled at Avila is admitted to all theatre productions free of charge.
For more information, contact Theatre Department at ext. 2405 or ext. 2411.

54

avila.edu/theatre/productions

STUDENT MEDIA AND PUBLICATIONS
SCOP is Avila's literary magazine. It is issued once‐a‐year at the end of the spring semester. Students comprise the
entire editorial staff under the guidance of the faculty advisor from the English Department. The magazine publishes
the best fiction, non‐fiction, short plays, and poetry the University has to offer.
Submissions to the magazine are open to all Avila students, faculty and staff. Awards are offered for the best work in
each category.
THE TALON is the multimedia student news network. The Talon publishes a news magazine, a Web site, e‐mail news
updates, a blog, Facebook , and YouTube pages, as well as podcasts directed toward Avila students. The news magazine
is published monthly and the Web sites are updated regularly. The Talon is a member of the Associated Collegiate Press
and the College Publisher Network. Previous experience is NOT required to serve on the staff, and participation is open
to ANYONE interested in news, magazine, Web, blog, social networking, photography, video, as well as electronic
media production and distribution. Students will be actively engaged in the business, management, operational,
advertising, design, sales, and reporting aspects of the Talon Media Network. Students are encouraged to participate in
this real‐time practical learning experience. thetalon‐online
THORNHILL ART GALLERY is in the Dallavis Center. The gallery presents eight exhibits a year. Six of the exhibits feature
local, regional and international artists. The gallery also sponsors a High School Invitational and a Senior Art Show every
spring. To be considered for an exhibition, artists must submit a proposal with examples of work either electronically or
in hard copy. The contact number for the Thornhill Art Gallery is 816.501.2443 or Thornhill Art Gallery

VIII. Directories & Miscellaneous
KANSAS CITY HIGHLIGHTS
visitkc.com
Places of Worship
All Saints Episcopal Church 9201 Wornall 363.2450
Beth Shalom Congregation 14200 Lamar Ave 361.2990
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter‐Day Saints 8144 Holmes 363.2245
First Baptist Church of KC 100 W Red Bridge 942.1866
First Church of the Nazarene 11811 State Line 942.9022
Greek Orthodox Church of the Annunciation 12001 WornallRd 444.8045
John Knox Presbyterian 11430 Wornall Rd 942.3637
Red Bridge United Methodist 636 E 117 th Street 941.0112
St. Thomas More (Catholic) 11822 Holmes 942.2492

Area Shopping
Oak Park Mall 95th & Quivira, Overland Park, KS (20 min NW)
Ward Parkway 89th & Stateline (10 min NE)
Town Center Plaza 119th & Roe (5 min W)

55

Area Attractions
Kansas City Chiefs 816.920.9300
Kansas City Royals Baseball 816.921.8000
KC Symphony 816.471.0400
Kansas City Jazz Museum 816.474.8463
Kansas City T‐Bones Baseball 913.328.2255
Kansas City Sporting Soccer 913.387.3400
Kansas City Zoo 816.513.5700
Lyric Opera 816.471.7344
Missouri Repertory Theatre 816.235.2700
Negro Leagues Baseball Museum 816.221.1920
Nelson‐Atkins Museum of Art 816.751.1278
Starlight Theatre 816.363.7827

Area Banks
Bank of America 7624 State Line 816.979.8805
Commerce Bank 13333 Holmes 816.234.2656
US Bank 11204 Holmes 816.508.3861
Going to the Movies? *Student Discount Offered
AMC Ward Parkway 14 8600 Ward Parkway 816.333.1300
* Oak Park Plaza 6 AMC Theatre 9747 Quivira (near Oak Park Mall) 888.262.4386
* Town Center AMC 20 (Town Center Plaza) 11701 Nall Ave 913.498.8696
Food Deliveries ‐ Delivery drivers are not permitted in residence halls. They must be met at the main door.
When calling or ordering online, please be sure to specify what building you are in and inform the driver that you will
meet at the main door.

Classroom Locations
1. Borserine Center (BOR) ‐ Goppert Theatre, Humanities, Music, and Nursing Center
Classrooms:
o Lower Level – 300 – 319
o Upper Level – 400 – 424
2. Carondelet First Floor (CAR) ‐ Office of Ministry, Service & Action, Advantage Institute, Center for
Global Studies & Social Justice
Classrooms:
oA&B
o 101
3. Dallavis Center (DAL) ‐ Art Center, Communications, Photography, Thornhill Gallery and TV Studio
Classrooms:
o 800 – 820
4. Foyle Hall ‐ Chapel and School of Education & Psychology
Classrooms:
o 900
5. Hodes Center (HOD) ‐ Career Services, Counseling Services, Student Access Office, Student Affairs Office, Student
Success Offices, TRIO Offices
Classrooms:
o 714
o 150

56

6. O’Rielly Hall (ORI) ‐ Mathematics, Sciences, and Computer Labs
Classrooms:
o Lower Level – 101 – 116
o Upper Level – 201 – 212
7. Whitfield Center (WHI) ‐ ATM, Business Department, Campus Safety, MBA Offices, and Subway
Classrooms:
o 505 – 510

Other Public Camp
Buildings
Blasco Hall
Admission Offices, Alumni Office, Academic Affairs Office, Human Resources, President’s Office, Registration/Student
Records
Hooley‐Bundschu Library
Library, MOHELA Lab, Archives and Student Computer Labs
Mabee Fieldhouse
Athletic Department
Marian Center
Marian Center Lounge, Bookstore, Coffee Shop
Dining Hall, Eagles Nest (Student Union), Food Service Offices
2021‐2022
Provost and Vice President for
Academic Affairs
Dr. Sue Wilcox 816.501.3759
DEANS:
College of Liberal Arts and Social Sciences
Dr. Charlene Gould 816.501.3689
College of Science and Health
Dr. Darrin Smith 816.501.3655

57

Addendum 1

INTERIM: SEXUAL AND GENDER‐BASED HARASSMENT, SEXUAL VIOLENCE,
RELATIONSHIP AND INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE, AND STALKING POLICY*

STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
The University is committed to maintaining a learning and working environment that is free from
discrimination based on sex in accordance with Title IX of the Higher Education Amendments of 1972
(“Title IX”), which prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in education programs or activities; Title VII
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (“Title VII”), which prohibits sex discrimination in employment; and the
Campus Sexual Violence Elimination Act (“SaVE Act”), Violence Against Women Act (“VAWA”), and Jeanne
Clery Disclosure of Campus Security Policy and Campus Crime Act. The University will promptly discipline
any individuals within its control who violate this Policy.
Accordingly, Avila University urges an individual to make a formal report if that individual is the victim of
sexual misconduct or harassment, has knowledge of another person being the victim of sexual
misconduct or harassment, or believes in good faith that they have witnessed a possible warning sign of
sexual misconduct or harassment. A report of sexual misconduct or harassment will be dealt with
promptly. Confidentiality will be maintained to the greatest extent possible.
Further, Avila University is committed to non‐discrimination and equal opportunity to its students
including, but not limited to, recruitment, admissions, financial aid, educational policies, placement
services, housing, athletics, sponsorship, conduct of co‐curricular activities, and other University
administered programs and services.
These policies are to be administered without regard to sex, race, religion, age, color, sexual orientation,
gender identity, disability, or national origin.
The University operates from a value system in which caring, sharing and respect are paramount. While
we value diversity and seek to serve all segments of society, we do not aspire to be only a reflection of
society. We seek higher goals, with higher values, and higher standards. This is the community that you
have chosen; one that expects more from itself, more from one another, and more from you.

APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE
This Policy applies to all University administrators, faculty, staff, students, contractors, outside vendors,
and other third parties within the University’s control, including visitors, invitees, and applicants for
admission or employment. It applies to conduct that occurs on University owned or controlled premises,
Page 58

in an education program or activity (including, but not limited to, admissions, employment, academics,
athletics, housing, and student services) including University sponsored or supported events, buildings
owned or controlled by student organizations officially recognized by the University, or off campus when
the conduct potentially affects a person’s education or employment with the University or potentially
poses a risk of harm to members of the University community. It also applies regardless of the gender,
gender identity or sexual orientation of the parties.
This policy does not apply to Sexual Harassment that occurs off‐campus, in a private setting, and outside
the scope of the Universities’ Education Program and Activities; such Sexual Misconduct may be
prohibited by the Student Code of Conduct if committed by a student, the Faculty and Staff Handbook if
committed by an employee, or other University policies and standards if committed by an employee.

DEFINITIONS
Coercion
The use of pressure to compel another individual to initiate or continue sexual activity against an
individual’s will. Coercion can include a wide range of behaviors, including psychological or emotional
pressure, physical or emotional threats, intimidation, manipulation, or blackmail that causes the person to
engage in unwelcome sexual activity. A person’s words or conduct are sufficient to constitute coercion if
they eliminate a reasonable person’s freedom of will and ability to choose whether or not to engage in
sexual activity. Examples of coercion include but are not limited to threating to “out” someone based on
sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression; threating to harm oneself if the other party
does not engage in the sexual activity; and threating to expose someone’s prior sexual activity to another
person.

Complainant
The individual who is alleged to be the victim of any prohibited conduct under the Policy.

Consent
Consent is a verbal agreement or action that must be active, voluntary, informed, and mutual. Consent or
lack of consent may be expressed or implied. The legal age to give sexual consent in the state of Missouri
is 17.
Each participant in a sexual encounter must obtain consent for all sexual activities. Consent to one form
of sexual activity does not constitute consent to engage in all forms of sexual activity.
Consent may be withdrawn by either party at any time. Withdrawal of consent should be outwardly
demonstrated by words or actions that indicate a desire to end sexual activity. Once withdrawal of
consent has been expressed, sexual activity must cease.
Page 59

Consent to engage in a sexual encounter with one person does not imply consent to engage in a sexual
encounter with another.
Consent consists of an outward demonstration indicating that an individual has freely chosen to engage in
sexual activity. Consent may not be inferred from silence, passivity, lack of resistance or lack of response
alone. A person who does not physically resist or verbally refuse sexual activity is not necessary giving
consent.
Individuals with a previous or current intimate relationship do not automatically give either initial or
continued consent to sexual activity. Even in the context of a relationship, there must be mutually
understandable communication that indicates a willingness to engage in sexual activity.
Consent cannot be given by a person who lacks the mental capacity to authorize the sexual
encounter/activities and such mental incapacity is manifest or known to the individual initiating the act
Consent cannot be given by a person who by reason of youth, mental disease or defect, or incapacitated,
is clearly unable or known by the individual initiating the act to be unable to make a reasonable judgment
as to the nature or harmfulness of the sexual encounter/activities; or Consent cannot be induced by
force, duress, or deception.
Consent cannot be procured by Coercion. Coercion is verbal and/or physical conduct, including
manipulation, intimidation, unwanted contact, and express or implied threats of physical, emotional, or
other harm, that would reasonably place an individual in fear of immediate or future harm and that is
employed to compel someone to engage in sexual contact. Force is the use or threat of physical violence
or intimidation to overcome an individual’s freedom of will to choose whether or not to participate in
sexual contact.

Dating Violence
Dating Violence is defined by Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act (VAWA) as “violence
committed by a person who is or has been in a social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature with
the victim. The existence of such a relationship would be determined based on the Complainant’s
statement and with consideration of the length of the relationship, the type of relationship, the frequency
of interaction between the persons involved in the relationship.”
Examples of this type of behavior include, but are not limited to: (1) Verbal—threatens the partner or
someone/something the partner cares about; (2) Emotional—jealousy, trying to control the partner’s
activities or behaviors, calling or messaging frequently to “keep tabs” on the partner, telling the partner
how to dress, stalking or any behavior that elicits fear in the partner; (3) Physical—hitting, slapping,
punching, shoving, pinching, kicking, hair pulling, strangulation, restraining biting scratching; (4) Sexual—

Page 60

unwanted touching or kissing, forcing or coercing the partner to have sex or engage in any unwanted
sexual activity, not allowing the partner to use birth control.

Domestic Violence
Domestic Violence is defined by VAWA as “…violence committed by a current or former spouse or
intimate partner of the victim, by a person with whom the victim shares a child in common, by a person
who is cohabitating with or has cohabitated with the victim as a spouse...”

Examples of domestic violence include: (1) Causing or attempting to cause physical or mental harm to a
family or household member; (2) Placing a family or household member in fear of physical or mental
harm; (3) Causing or attempting to cause a family or household member to engage in involuntary sexual
activity by force, or duress; (4) An act taken toward a family or household member that would cause a
reasonable person to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed, or molested.

Domestic violence also is viewed as a learned pattern of physical, verbal, sexual and/or emotional
behaviors in which one person in a relationship uses force and intimidation to dominate or control the
other person.

Education Program or Activity
A University education program or activity means all of the operations of the University in any locations,
events, or circumstances over which the University exercises substantial control over both the
Respondent and the context in which the Sexual Harassment occurs, and also includes any building
owned or controlled by a student organization that is officially recognized by the University.

Hostile Environment Harassment
A single or isolated incident of sexual harassment based on sexual harassment alone may create a hostile
environment if the incident is sufficiently severe. The more severe the conduct, the less need there is to
show a repetitive series of incidents to create a hostile environment, particularly if the harassment is
physical. The determination of whether an environment is “hostile” must be based on all the
circumstances. These circumstances could include, but are not limited to:
The frequency of the speech or conduct;

The nature and severity of the speech or conduct;

Page 61

Whether the conduct was physically threatening;

Whether the speech or conduct was humiliating;

The effect of the speech or conduct on the individual’s’ mental and/or emotional state;

Whether the speech or conduct was directed at more than one person;

Whether the speech or conduct arose in the context of other discriminatory conduct;

Whether the speech or conduct unreasonably interfered with the individual’s educational opportunities
or performance (including study abroad), college‐controlled living environment, or work opportunities or
performance;
Whether a statement is a mere utterance of an epithet which engenders offense in an employee or a
student or offends by mere discourtesy or rudeness, micro‐aggression; and/or
Whether the speech or conduct deserves the protections of academic freedom.
Examples of conduct that may constitute sexual harassment as defined above may include severe,
persistent or pervasive pattern of unwelcome conduct that includes one or more of the following:

Physical conduct:
Unwelcome touching, sexual/physical assault, impeding, restraining, or blocking movements;

Unwanted sexual advances within the employment or academic context;

Verbal conduct:
Making or using derogatory comments, epithets, slurs or humor;

Verbal abuse of a sexual nature, graphic verbal commentaries about an individual’s body, sexually
degrading words used to describe an individual, suggestive or obscene letters, notes or invitations;

Page 62

Objectively offensive comments of a sexual nature, including persistent or pervasive sexually explicit
statements, questions, jokes, or anecdotes;

Visual or non‐verbal conduct:
Leering, making sexual gestures, displaying of suggestive objects or pictures, cartoons or posters in a
public space or forum;
Severe, persistent, or pervasive visual displays of suggestive, erotic, or degrading sexually oriented images
that are not pedagogically appropriate.

Incapacitation
An individual who is incapacitated lacks the ability to make informed judgments and cannot consent to
sexual contact. Incapacitation is the inability, temporarily or permanently, to give consent because an
individual is mentally and/or physically helpless, asleep, unconscious, or unaware that sexual activity is
occurring. Mentally helpless means a person is rendered temporarily incapable of appraising or
controlling one’s own conduct. Physically helpless means a person is physically unable to verbally or
otherwise communicate consent or unwillingness to an act. Where alcohol or other drugs are involved,
incapacitation is a state beyond impairment or intoxication. Where alcohol or other drugs are involved,
evaluating incapacitation requires an assessment of how the consumption of alcohol and/or drugs affects
a person’s: decision‐making ability; awareness of consequences; ability to make informed, rational
judgments; capacity to appreciate the nature and quality of the act; or level of consciousness. The
assessment is based on objectively and reasonably apparent indications of incapacitation when viewed
from the perspective of a reasonable person.

Other Inappropriate Sexual Conduct
Conduct on the basis of sex that does not meet the definition of Sexual Harassment under Title IX, but is
considered inappropriate and a violation of other University policy, includes:

Verbal conduct (including through electronic means) constituting unwanted statements of a sexual
nature, intentionally directed to a person or group of people that are objectively offensive to a reasonable
person and also so severe or pervasive that they created a Hostile Environment. The type of verbal
conduct that violates this policy may include:
Unwelcome sexual advances (including explicit or implicit proposition(s) of sexual contact or activity);
Requests for sexual favors (including overt or subtle pressure);
Gratuitous comments about an individual’s sexual activities or speculation about an individual’s sexual
experiences;
Page 63

Gratuitous comments, jokes, questions, anecdotes or remarks of a sexual nature about clothing or bodies;
Persistent, unwanted sexual or romantic attention;
Exposure to sexually suggestive visual displays such as photographs, graffiti, posters, calendars or other
materials; or
Deliberate, repeated humiliation or intimidation.
Physical conduct that does not fall within the Title IX definition of Sexual Harassment, but which violates
the other University policy, includes:
Sexual exploitation;
Unwelcome intentional touching of a sexual nature;
Deliberate physical interference with or restriction of movement; or
Sexual violence.

Participants
The term “participants” includes the Complainant, Respondent, and any witnesses.

Parties
The term “parties” refers to the “Complainant” and the “Respondent” under this policy.

Preponderance of the Evidence
The greater weight of the credible evidence. Preponderance of the evidence is the standard for
determining allegations of prohibited conduct under this Policy. This standard is satisfied if the action is
deemed more likely to have occurred than not.

Privacy
For the purposes of this policy, privacy generally means that information related to a report of
misconduct will be shared with a limited circle of individuals who “need to know” in order to assist in the
review, investigation, and findings, and related issues. Individuals who are routinely involved in Avila
University’s Title IX response receive specific training and guidance about safeguarding private
information in accordance with applicable laws.

Sexual Assault
VAWA defines sexual assault as “an offense classified as a forcible or non‐forcible sex offense under the
uniform crime reporting system of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.” Penetration, no matter how
slight, of the vagina or anus with any body part or object, or oral penetration by a sex organ of another
person, without the consent of the victim.
Page 64

Examples of sexual assault under this policy include, but are not limited to, the following behaviors,
however slight, when consent is not present:
Sexual intercourse (anal, oral, or vaginal). Intercourse, however slight, meaning vaginal penetration by a
penis, object, tongue, or finger; anal penetration by a penis, object, tongue, or finger; or oral (mouth to
genital contact or genital to mouth contact).
Intentional contact with the breasts, buttocks, groin, or genitals, or touching another with any of these
body parts, or making another touch you or themselves with or on any of these body parts.

Rape – Having carnal knowledge of a person, without consent of the victim, including instances where
the victim is incapable of giving consent because of age or because of temporary or permanent mental or
physical incapacity. There is “carnal knowledge” if there is the slightest penetration of the vagina or penis
by the sex organ of the other person. Attempted rape is included.

Sodomy – Oral or anal sexual intercourse with another person without the consent of the victim,
including instances where the victim is incapable of giving consent because of age or because of
temporary or permanent mental or physical incapacity.

Sexual assault with an object – Using an object or instrument to unlawfully penetrate, however
slightly, the genital or anal opening of the body of another person, without the consent of the victim,
including instances where the victim is in capable of giving consent because of age or because of
temporary or permanent mental or physical incapacity. An “object” or “instrument” is anything used by
the perpetrator other than the perpetrator’s genitalia.

Fondling – Touching of the private body parts of another person for the purpose of sexual gratification,
without the consent of the victim, including instances where the victim is incapable of giving consent
because of age or because of temporary or permanent mental or physical incapacity.

Incest – Sexual intercourse between persons who are related to each other within the degrees wherein
marriage is prohibited by law.

Page 65

Statutory Rape ‐ In Missouri, a person commits the crime of second degree statutory rape or sodomy
by engaging in sexual intercourse with a person under the age of 17 when the defendant is over the age
of 21. No matter what the defendant’s age, it is a crime (first degree statutory rape or sodomy) to engage
in sexual intercourse or sodomy with a child under the age of 14.

Sexual Exploitation
Sexual Exploitation occurs when an individual takes non‐consensual or abusive sexual advantage of
another for their own advantage or benefit, or to benefit or advantage anyone other than the one being
exploited, and that behavior does not otherwise constitute one of other sexual misconduct offenses.
Voyeurism (such as watching or taking pictures, videos, or audio recording of another person in a state of
undress or of another person engaging in a sexual act without the consent of all parties).

Exposing portions of one’s body in such a manner that it may be seen by someone who reasonably could
be offended.

Disseminating, streaming, sharing, or posting pictures or video of another in a state of undress or of a
sexual nature without the person’s consent (i.e. revenge porn).

Prostituting or trafficking another person.

Sexual Harassment
Conduct on the basis of sex that satisfies one or more of the following:
Quid pro quo: An employee of the University conditioning the provision of an aid, benefit, or service of
the University on an individual’s participation in unwelcome sexual conduct;
Unwelcome conduct determined by a reasonable person to be so severe, pervasive, and objectively
offensive that it effectively denies a person equal access to the University’s education program or activity;
or
“Sexual Assault,” “Dating Violence,” “Domestic Violence,” or “Stalking” as defined in the Violence Against
Women Act.

This definition are not evaluated for severity, pervasiveness, offensiveness, or denial of equal educational
access, because such conduct is sufficiently serious to deprive a person of equal access. Therefore, any
instance of quid pro quo sexual harassment and any instance of Sexual Assault, Dating Violence, Domestic
Page 66

Violence, and Stalking are considered Sexual Harassment under this Policy.

Sexual Misconduct — Broadly defined to encompass sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual
assault, domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, and other Inappropriate Sexual Conduct.

Sexual Violence — Physical sexual acts perpetrated against a person’s will or where a person is
incapable of giving consent. The term includes, but is not limited to, rape, sexual assault, sexual battery,
sexual coercion, sexual abuse, indecency with a child, and/or aggravated sexual assault.

Stalking — Engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person that would cause a reasonable
person to fear for his or her safety or the safety of others, or suffer substantial emotional distress. For the
purposes of this definition:
Course of conduct means two or more acts, including, but not limited to, acts in which the stalker directly,
indirectly, or through third parties, by any action, method, device, or means, follows, monitors, observes,
surveils, threatens, or communicates to or about a person, or interferes with a person’s property.
Reasonable person means a reasonable person under similar circumstances.
Substantial emotional distress means significant mental suffering or anguish that may, but does not
necessarily, require medical or other professional treatment or counseling.

REPORTING
Reporting Sexual Misconduct incidents informs the University of the Incident, which allows the University
to provide Supportive Measures to the Complainant and does not necessarily result in the initiation of the
Complaint Resolution Process. All Complainants who report incidents of Sexual Misconduct will be
offered individualized Supportive Measures.
Any person may report Sexual Misconduct, Retaliation, or other conduct prohibited under this Policy to
the Title IX Coordinator, whether or not the person reporting is the person alleged to be the victim of the
incident, and it can be a verbal or written report to one of the Title IX Co‐Coordinators:
Vice President for Student Affairs
Phone number: (816) 501‐2465
Email: Alicia.Murillo@avila.edu
102 Hodes
Director of Human Resources
Phone number: (816) 501‐3618
Page 67

Email: Jody.Mitchell@avila.edu
112 Carondelet

Filing a Formal Complaint
The Complainant may file a Formal Complaint with the Title IX Coordinator. A Formal Complaint must be
filed if a Complainant wishes to initiate the Complaint Resolution Process.

Amnesty
At times, an individual(s) may be hesitant to report the occurrence of misconduct to Avila officials
because they are concerned that they themselves, or a witness to misconduct, may be found responsible
for other policy violations, such as alcohol or drug violations. Although violations of University policy are
not condoned, the importance of addressing the alleged misconduct takes priority. Therefore, Avila will
not refer an individual or a witness who makes a report of misconduct to the student conduct system as a
responsible party for any other violations that may have occurred in connection with the reported
allegations of misconduct.

Anonymity
You may make an anonymous report by telephone through the Avila’s Campus Conduct Hotline (866)
943‐5787. Your decision to remain anonymous, however, may greatly limit the University’s ability to stop
the alleged conduct, investigate, or take action against parties accused of violating this Policy.

Timeliness of Reporting
Institutional Officers are required to report known incidents of and/or information regarding Sexual
Misconduct promptly to the Title IX Coordinator. For others in the University community, you are strongly
encouraged to report Sexual Misconduct, Retaliation, and any other conduct prohibited under this Policy
as soon as you become aware of such conduct.

Reporting to Campus Safety or Law Enforcement
You may also file a report with Campus Safety at (816) 985‐6079 or to the Kansas City Police Department
(816) 234‐5550 (non‐emergency) or 911 (emergency).

Confidential Support and Resources
Confidentiality
Students who would like to discuss their situations in a confidential environment, and share or seek
information about a sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence, or stalking issue without making a
report, have a number of options. You can discuss an incident in confidence by using the confidential
resources. To view options of confidential Supportive Measures on and off campus please view Avila’s
Page 68

Resource and Referral Options worksheet. Students may discuss an incident with Confidential Employees or an

off‐campus resource (e.g., rape crisis center, doctor, psychologist, clergyperson, etc.) without concern
that the person’s identity will be reported to the Title IX Office. Employees may seek assistance from the
Employee Assistance Program, their own personal health care provider, the clergyperson of their choice,
or an off‐campus rape crisis resource without concern that the person’s identity will be reported to the
Title IX Office.
When consulting University resources, all parties should be aware of confidentiality, privacy, and
mandatory reporting to make informed choices. At Avila University, some resources can offer
confidentiality, sharing options and advice without any obligation to tell anyone unless Complainant
prefers it. Other resources are expressly there to report crimes and policy violations and will take action
when the incident is reported to them. Most University resources fall in the middle of these two
extremes. Neither the University nor the law requires them to divulge private information that is shared
with them except in certain circumstances, some of which are described below. A Complainant may seek
assistance from these University officials without starting a formal process that is beyond the
Complainant’s control, or violates her/his privacy.

Report Confidentially
If one desires that details of the incident be kept confidential, they should speak with our on‐campus
mental health counselor or off‐campus rape crisis resources who can maintain confidentiality. For
students outside the KC metropolitan area, please dial 211 or connect online with 211 for United Way
Resources in a particular area. The campus counselor is available to students help free of charge, and
they will provide off‐campus resources specializing in services important for the complainant and
respondent.

The University counselor will not report incidents to the University for Investigation without consent.
However, when the situation involves a crime, they will notify the appropriate University personnel for
the sole reason of including the crime in the University’s annual crime statistics disclosure. The
Complainant’s name will not be divulged in this situation. The University counselor also will notify
appropriate University personnel if the incident suggests a Complainant or Respondent poses a danger to
themselves or others.

Advice may be sought from certain resources who are not required to tell anyone else any private,
personally identifiable information unless there is cause for fear of safety or the safety of others. These
are individuals who the University has not specifically designated as “persons with authority” for purposes
of putting the institution on notice or “Responsible Employee” for whom mandatory reporting is required,
other than in the stated limited circumstances. Recommended University staff include:
Page 69

Counseling and Career Services 816‐501‐3767, or
Campus Ministry 816‐501‐2423

If unsure of a staff member’s duties and ability to maintain privacy, ask them before speaking to them.
They will be able to provide the relevant privacy information, and help make decisions about who can
help best. If personally identifiable information is shared, it will only be shared as necessary with as few
people as possible, and all efforts will be made for privacy protection.

Confidential and Anonymous Supportive Measures
Confidential and Anonymous Resources can maintain the confidentiality of a Complainant’s disclosures
and will not share any information with Avila University. If the victim does not want to pursue action
within the University system or the criminal justice system at this time, they/them may still want to
consider having a confidential or anonymous report made. The purpose of a confidential or anonymous
report is to comply with the victim’s wish to keep the matter private while taking steps to ensure future
safety for the victim and others.
Counseling and Career Services
Phone number: (816) 501‐3767
Email: CounselingandCareerServices@avila.edu

Campus Ministry
Phone number: (816) 501‐2423
Email: CampusMinistry@avila.edu
Anonymous Reporting
Campus Conduct Hotline: (866) 943‐5787

ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Institutional Officials
While able to maintain an individual’s privacy, Institutional Officials are required to immediately share all
known details of incidents of misconduct with the Title IX Coordinator.
An Institutional Official (IO) are those designated employees in a leadership or supervisory position, or
who have significant responsibility for the welfare of Students or Employees. The University considers IOs
to be directors, deans, vice presidents, other administrators with supervisory responsibilities, campus
safety, faculty, and human resources. Though they are not IOs, all other University employees are

Page 70

expected to report all known information concerning the incidents of Sexual Misconduct of which they
become aware to the Title IX Coordinator.
Resident Assistants are expected to report all known information concerning the incidents of Sexual
Misconduct of which they become aware to the Title IX Coordinator.
This list is not exhaustive; any questions about the status of an employee as an Institutional Official should
be addressed to the Title IX Coordinator.

Title IX Coordinator
The Title IX Coordinator is the senior University administrator who oversees the University’s compliance
with Title IX and is responsible for the University’s administrative response to reports and Formal
Complaints of Sexual Misconduct, Retaliation, and other conduct prohibited under this Policy. The Title IX
Coordinator is available to discuss the Complaint Resolution Process, coordinate Supportive Measures,
explain University policies and procedures, and provide education on relevant issues. The Title IX
Coordinator may designate one or more Deputy Title IX Coordinators to facilitate these responsibilities.
Any member of the University community may contact the Title IX Coordinator with questions.
The Title IX Coordinators can be contacted by telephone, email, or in person during regular office hours:
Vice President for Student Affairs
Phone number: (816) 501‐2465
Email: Alicia.Murillo@avila.edu
102 Hodes
Director of Human Resources
Phone number: (816) 501‐3618
Email: Jody.Mitchell@avila.edu
112 Carondelet

Investigator(s)
The University will ensure that Formal Complaints are properly investigated under this Policy by
investigators assigned to the Formal Complaint. The investigators are neutral and impartial fact‐finders,
and gather evidence during the investigation. The investigators are responsible for completing an
investigation report at the conclusion of the investigation. When designated, the Title IX Deputy
Coordinators may supervise and advise the Title IX investigators when conducting investigations and
update the Title IX Coordinator as necessary to ensure compliance with Title IX.

Page 71

Hearing Officer(s)
A Hearing Officer(s) is responsible for conducting the Title IX Complaint Resolution Process hearing in an
orderly manner, controlling the conduct of all participants and attendees of the hearing, and rendering a
written determination regarding responsibility with respect to the Respondent’s alleged conduct charges
in an impartial, neutral, and objective manner.

Advisors
An advisor a person chosen by a party or appointed by the University to accompany the party to meetings
related to the Complaint Resolution Process, to advise the party on that process, and to conduct cross‐
examination for the party at the hearing, if any.

Appeals Hearing Officer
A single Appeal decision‐maker will be designated who has not been involved in any way in the Complaint
Resolution Process previously.

The University retains discretion to retain and appoint suitably qualified persons who are not University
employees to fulfill any function of the University under this policy, including, but not limited to, Title IX
Coordinator, investigator, hearing officer, administrative officer, informal resolution officer, and appeals
officer.

The University also retains discretion to appoint two or more persons to jointly fulfill the role of
investigator, hearing officer, administrative officer, informal resolution officer, and/or appeals officer.

The functions assigned to a given University official under this policy, including but not limited to the
functions assigned to the Title IX Coordinator, investigator, hearing officer, administrative officer, informal
resolution officer, and appeals officer, may, in the University’s discretion, be delegated by such University
official to any suitably qualified individual and such delegation may be recalled by the University at any
time.

PARTIES’ RIGHTS: CONFIDENTIALITY, REQUESTS TO NOT INVESTIGATE, AND
REQUESTS TO DISMISS FORMAL COMPLAINTS
The University has great respect for the privacy of the parties identified in a report or Formal Complaint.
Under state law, however, Institutional Official who receive information of alleged Sexual Misconduct
must share that information with the Title IX Coordinator. As such, the University may need to act to
maintain campus safety and must determine whether to investigate further, regardless of the
Page 72

Complainant’s request for confidentiality or request to not investigate a report received by the Title IX
Coordinator.

In making determinations regarding requests for confidentiality, Complainants’ requests to not
investigate, Complainants’ requests to dismiss Formal Complaints, and/or requests to not disclose
identifying information to Respondents, the Title IX Coordinator must deliberately weigh the rights,
interests, and safety of the Complainant, the Respondent, and the campus community. Factors the
University must consider when determining whether to investigate an alleged incident of Sexual
Misconduct include, but are not limited to:
The seriousness of the alleged incident;
Whether the University has received other reports of alleged Sexual Misconduct by the alleged
Respondent;
Whether the alleged incident poses a risk of harm to others; and
Any other factors the University determines relevant.
If the Complainant requests in writing that the University not investigate a report, the University must
inform the Complainant of the decision whether or not to investigate.
If the University dismisses a Formal Complaint, the University must provide the Complainant and
Respondent a written notice of the dismissal and the reason(s) for the dismissal.
In the course of the Complaint Resolution Process, the University may share information only as
necessary with people who need to know in compliance with the law, which may include but is not
limited to the investigators, witnesses, Complainant, Respondent, parties’ Advisors, Hearing Officer, and
the Appeals Hearing Officer—if applicable.

SUPPORTIVE MEASURES
The University will offer reasonably available individualized services, without any fee or charge, to the
parties involved in a reported incident of Sexual Misconduct with or without the filing of a Formal
Complaint, when applicable.
Supportive Measures may include, but are not limited to, modifications to: academic schedules, campus
housing, student leadership, working situations, as well as providing academic support or making special
arrangements for a leave of absence, withdrawing, or dropping classes without penalty, if requested and
reasonably available. Mutual restrictions on contact between the parties may also be imposed. The
University may impose such other similar measures as it deems necessary and tailored to the
individualized needs of the parties.
Page 73

Supportive Measures are non‐disciplinary and non‐punitive measures that do not unreasonably burden
the other party. Any disciplinary or punitive measures may only be implemented following the conclusion
of the Complaint Resolution Process, unless an emergency removal is appropriate.
The University will maintain the confidentiality of Supportive Measures provided to the parties, to the
extent that maintaining such confidentiality does not impair the ability of the University to provide the
Supportive Measures.
The University will treat all parties with fairness and respect in accordance with the principles of due
process.
The Title IX Co‐Coordinators 816‐501‐2465 or 816‐501‐3618 can assist with understanding the University
policies and the Student Judicial Procedure, listen to concerns, help identify options, and refer to other
Supportive Measures as needed.
The Office of Counseling and Career Services 816‐501‐3767 can confidentially assist in dealing with stress
related to the report and work to develop strategies for healthy coping.

FORMAL COMPLAINT
To begin the Complaint Resolution Process, the Complainant must sign a Formal Complaint requesting an
investigation and submit it to the Title IX Coordinator at darby.gough@avila.edu. The Complainant must
submit a written statement setting out the known details of the alleged conduct that is the subject of the
Formal Complaint, including the following:
Complainant’s name and contact information;
Respondent’s name;
Detailed description of the alleged conduct or event that is the basis of the alleged violation under this
Policy;
Date(s) and location(s) of the alleged occurrence(s);
Names of any witnesses to the alleged occurrence(s); and
The resolution sought.
The Complainant may also submit any documents or information that is relevant to the Formal Complaint.
The Title IX Coordinator may also sign a Formal Complaint against a Respondent (requesting an
investigation) and in doing so will initiate the Complaint Resolution Process.

Page 74

MANDATORY AND DISCRETIONARY DISMISSAL OF FORMAL COMPLAINTS
Mandatory Dismissals
Under the regulations governing the University’s implementation of Title IX, the University is required to
distinguish between conduct that is prohibited under Title IX and conduct that violates another University
policy. The University must dismiss a Formal Complaint under Title IX if: (1) the Formal Complaint
describes conduct which, even if proven true, would not satisfy the definition of Sexual Harassment under
Title IX; (2) the alleged conduct did not occur in the University’s education program or activity; or (3) the
alleged conduct did not occur against a person in the United States. If the Formal Complaint is dismissed
under Title IX, the University may still investigate the complaint for allegations under another University
policy.

Discretionary Dismissals
The University may dismiss a Formal Complaint, at its discretion, under this Policy’s Complaint Resolution
Process for any of the following reasons:
If the Complainant submits a written request to dismiss a Formal Complaint (e.g., withdraws the Formal
Complaint or any allegations therein);
If the Respondent was a University employee at the time of the incident, but is no longer employed by the
University at the time the Formal Complaint is filed;
Circumstances or limited information prevent the University from completing an investigation sufficient
to reach a determination as to the Formal Complaint or any allegations therein; or
The conduct alleged does not meet the definition of any prohibited conduct under this Policy.

Notice of Dismissal
If the University dismisses a Formal Complaint, the University must provide both parties a written notice
of the dismissal and the reason(s) for the dismissal.

Concurrent Criminal or Civil Proceedings
The University will not, as a matter of course, delay taking action on a Formal Complaint pending the
outcome of a concurrent criminal or civil justice proceeding. The University has an independent duty to
respond to Formal Complaints of Sexual Misconduct. At the University’s discretion, the University may
delay the investigation or Complaint Resolution Process for a brief period due to concurrent criminal or
civil proceedings on a case‐by‐case basis.

Page 75

Written Notice of the Formal Complaint, and Notification of University Offices
Offering Assistance
After receiving a Formal Complaint, the Title IX Office will provide a written notice to the parties of the
Formal Complaint and available University resources and assistance.
The written notice of the Formal Complaint will include at least the following:
Notification of the Complaint Resolution Process;
Notice of the allegations that potentially constitute prohibited conduct under this Policy, including
sufficient details about the alleged conduct, including the identity of the parties, if known, and the
date(s), time(s), and location(s) of alleged conduct known by the University at the time of the Formal
Complaint;

Notice of the potential policy violations being investigated;

A statement that the Respondent is presumed not responsible for the alleged conduct and that the
determination regarding responsibility will be made at the conclusion of the Complaint Resolution
Process;

Notice that both parties may have an advisor of their choice, who may be, but is not required to be, an
attorney, and may inspect and review all evidence, and that the University will provide a trained advisor if
either party so requests;

A statement that the parties may review evidence gathered as part of any investigation; and

Notice that knowingly making false statements or knowingly submitting false information during the
Complaint Resolution Process is prohibited and subject to disciplinary action under the Student Code of
Conduct or Faculty/Staff Handbook.

Informal Resolution
After the parties have been provided written notice of a Formal Complaint, each may agree, in writing, to
use an informal resolution option at any point prior to reaching a determination regarding responsibility,
but need not agree to informal resolution. The Informal Resolution process is not available, however, to
resolve allegations that a University employee sexually harassed a student.

Page 76

At any point prior to agreeing to an Informal Resolution, each party has the right to withdraw from the
Informal Resolution process and resume the Complaint Resolution Process with respect to the Formal
Complaint.

Informal Resolution could include, for example, a mediation process.

Informal Resolutions will be concluded within 45 days of notice to the University that the parties wish to
proceed with the Informal Resolution Process. The University’s receipt of such notice will “pause” the
Complaint Resolution Process, including the clock for concluding that process. If the parties fail to
completely resolve the allegations through an Informal Resolution, then the Complaint Resolution Process
will resume where the parties left off.

INVESTIGATION AND HEARING OF THE FORMAL COMPLAINT
The Respondent will be allowed a reasonable time after receiving notice of a Formal Complaint to
respond in writing and through an interview with the investigator.
The University will provide written notice to a party whose participation is invited or expected of the date,
time, location, participants, and purpose of all meetings, investigative interviews, or other proceedings in
the Complaint Resolution Process.

Evidence
The parties may present any information, evidence, or names of any fact or expert witnesses that may be
relevant to the Formal Complaint in the course of the investigation, and may have an advisor of their
choice attend any related interview, meeting, or proceeding in the Complaint Resolution Process.
Advisors are not permitted to actively participate in meetings prior to the hearing. The parties may submit
to the investigator any questions they would like asked of any known potential witnesses or parties.

Witness Interviews
The investigators will interview relevant and available witnesses. Neither the Complainant nor the
Respondent will normally attend these interviews; however, if either one is permitted to attend, the other
shall have the same right.

Investigation Timeframe
The University is committed to providing prompt, fair, and impartial investigation and resolution of
reports of violations of this policy, and therefore will aim to complete the investigation of a Formal
Complaint within 90 days of the filing of a Formal Complaint. The parties should be provided updates on
Page 77

the progress of the investigation, as needed. Extenuating circumstances may require the extension of
timeframes. Extenuating circumstances may include the complexity and scope of the allegations, the
number of witnesses involved, the availability of the parties or witnesses, any intervening school break or
vacation, or other unforeseen circumstances. Best efforts will be made to complete the process in a
timely manner by balancing principles of thoroughness and fundamental fairness with promptness.

Access to Evidence
Prior to the completion of the investigation report, the investigators will provide access to all evidence
obtained (whether relevant or not) as part of the investigation to both parties (and the party’s advisor, if
any, upon a party’s signed information release for their advisor of choice). Both parties will have 10 days
to inspect, review, and respond to the evidence. All responses to the evidence must be submitted by the
party in writing to the investigator. Advisors are not permitted to submit written responses to the
evidence on their own or on behalf of the party they are advising. The investigators will consider all
timely responses submitted by the parties.

The Investigative Report
The completed investigative report will: (a) describe each of the allegations that potentially constitute
conduct prohibited under this Policy; (b) provide a procedural history of the investigation; and (c) fairly
summarize all relevant evidence, participant statements, and responses to questions. The Investigator
will provide contemporaneously to each of the parties and each party’s advisor, if any, upon a party’s
signed information release for their Advisor of choice, a draft of the investigative report. The parties will
then have 10 days in which to provide a written response to the draft investigative report, which the
investigator will consider prior to completing the investigative report. At least 10 days prior to the date of
the scheduled hearing, the investigator must provide the final investigative report concurrently to all
parties and each party’s advisor, if any, upon a party’s signed information release for their advisor of
choice. The parties thus have the opportunity to review the investigative report and provide a written
response prior to or at the hearing. A copy of the completed investigative report also will be provided to
the Title IX Coordinator, and to the Hearing Officer(s) assigned for the hearing.

Presumption That Respondent Is Not Responsible
By law, it is presumed that the Respondent is not responsible for the alleged conduct unless the
Respondent is determined to be responsible at the conclusion of the Complaint Resolution Process.

Standard of Evidence
All Complaint Resolution Processes will use the preponderance of the evidence standard.
Page 78

The Live Hearing
Unless a Formal Complaint is dismissed, or the parties reach an Informal Resolution agreement, the
University will hold a live hearing for all Formal Complaints subject to the Complaint Resolution Process.

Joint Hearing
In hearings involving more than one Respondent or in which two (2) or more Complainants have accused
the same individual of substantially similar conduct, the default procedure will be to hear the allegations
jointly. However, the Title IX Coordinator may permit the investigation and/or hearings pertinent to each
Respondent to be conducted separately if there is a compelling reason to do so. In joint hearings,
separate determinations of responsibility will be made for each Respondent with respect to each alleged
policy violation.

Written Notice of the Hearing
The University will provide at least 10 days written notice to participants of the hearing (and the
participants’ advisors, if any, upon a participant’s signed information release for their advisor of choice),
including the date, time, location, names of all participants of the hearing (including the Hearing
Officer(s), and all parties and participants in the investigation report), purpose of the hearing, a statement
of the alleged conduct charges, and a summary statement of the evidence gathered.

Challenges to the Hearing Officer(s)
Either party may challenge the fairness, impartiality or objectivity of a Hearing Officer through submission
of a written statement to the office coordinating the hearing within 4 days of receiving notice of the
identity of the Hearing Officer, and must state the reasons for the challenge. The Hearing Officer will be
the sole judge of whether he or she can serve with fairness, impartiality, and objectivity. In the event that
the Hearing Officer recuses themselves, an alternative hearing officer will be assigned in accordance with
the institution’s procedures.

Hearing Chair
When a panel of three (3) Hearing Officers is used, one Hearing Officer will be designated as the Hearing
Chair. The Hearing Chair will rule on all procedural matters and on objections to exhibits or testimony of
participants at the hearing. If a single Hearing Officer is used, as may be the case for certain Complaint
Resolution Process hearings based on Hearing Officer availability or straightforward nature of the issues,
then no Hearing Chair needs to be appointed, and the single Hearing Officer will rule on all procedural
matters and on objections regarding exhibits and testimony of participants at the hearing. All Hearing
Officers, including the Hearing Chair, may question participants who testify at the hearing, and are
entitled to have the advice and assistance of legal counsel.
Page 79

Access to Evidence
Each party will have access to all of the evidence from the investigation, including a copy of the
completed investigative report.

Separate Rooms and Virtual Participation
At the request of either party, the University will allow the parties to participate in the hearing through
technology enabling them to participate remotely or virtually from separate locations, and to
simultaneously see and hear the participants answering questions.

Advisor of Choice
Each party may have an Advisor of their choice at the hearing. If a party does not have an Advisor, the
University will provide one. Advisors are not permitted to actively participate in the hearing, except for
asking questions of the other party and any other witnesses.

Each party may make opening and closing statements.

Privileged Information Excluded
No person will be required to disclose information protected under a legally recognized privilege. The
Hearing Officer(s) must not allow into evidence or rely upon any questions or evidence that may require
or seek disclosure of such information, unless the person holding the privilege has waived the privilege.
This includes information protected by the attorney‐client privilege.

Cross‐Examination of Witnesses
The Hearing Officer(s) may ask questions during the hearing of any party or witness and may be the first
person to ask questions of any party or witness. Each party’s Advisor will have an opportunity to ask
relevant questions and follow‐up questions of the other party and of any witnesses who participate in the
hearing, including questions that challenge credibility. Each Advisor has the right to ask questions
directly, orally, and in real time at the hearing. The parties will not be permitted to personally ask
questions of the other party or any witnesses that participate in the hearing. The Advisors may ask
questions under the following procedure:
The Advisor will ask a question of the applicable participant.

Page 80

Before the participant answers a question, the Hearing Chair or, when a single Hearing Officer is used, the
Hearing Officer, will rule as to whether the Advisor’s question is relevant to the alleged conduct charges.

If the Hearing Chair or Hearing Officer rules the Advisor’s question is not relevant, then the Hearing
Officer must explain any decision to exclude a question as not relevant. If the Hearing Chair or Hearing
Officer allows the question as relevant, the participant will answer it.

Limitations on Questions Regarding Prior Sexual History
A Complainant’s sexual predisposition or prior sexual behavior are not relevant except where questions
and evidence about a Complainant’s prior sexual behavior are offered to prove that someone other than
the Respondent committed the alleged conduct charged by the Complainant or if the questions or
evidence concern specific incidents of the Complainant’s prior sexual behavior with the Respondent and
are offered to prove the Complainant’s consent of the alleged conduct.

Witness Statements Excluded If Not Subject To Cross‐Examination
When reaching a responsibility determination, the Hearing Officer(s) may not rely on the statement of
any party or witness who refuses or otherwise fails to submit to cross‐examination during the hearing.
The Hearing Officer(s) may not, however, draw any inference regarding responsibility based solely on a
party’s or witness’s absence from the hearing or refusal to answer questions.

Recording
The hearing will be recorded in audio or audiovisual format and may be transcribed at the discretion of
the University. The recording or transcript, if applicable, will be available for the parties to inspect and
review, upon request.

The Hearing Officer Determination
The Hearing Officer(s) will send a copy of the written determination concurrently to the parties, or
appropriate administrator (for employee Respondents), and the Title IX Coordinator. The written
determination must include the following:
The conduct alleged to constitute prohibited conduct under this Policy;

A description of the procedural history of the Complaint Resolution Process;

Page 81

The findings of fact supporting the Hearing Officer(s)’s determination;

The conclusion(s) and a rationale as to whether the Respondent is responsible for each allegation;

Warning Level and the disciplinary sanctions, if applicable;

The remedies, if applicable, designed to restore the Complainant’s access to the education program or
activity; and

The University’s appeal procedures and grounds for appeal.

SANCTIONS AND REMEDIES
The following sanctions and remedies may be considered by the Hearing Officer(s) in accordance with this
Policy:

Possible Sanctions and Remedies for Student Respondents:
Educational training and/or counseling;
Deliver apology to those affect by the behavior/violation;
Activity or location restrictions;
Restitution or fines;
Loss of privileges or the addition of special conditions that need to be fulfilled;
Housing suspension;
Restorative Justice;
Temporary or permanent suspension from the University for a Specific Time Period;
Dismissal/Expulsion;
Restriction on eligibility to represent the University at any official function or in any intercollegiate
competition.
No shared classes or extra‐curricular activities;
Withholding of grades, official transcript, and/or degree;

Page 82

Bar against readmission, bar against enrollment, drop from one or more classes, and/or withdrawal from
the University;
Suspension of rights and privileges, including but not limited to participation in athletic or extracurricular
activities or ban from facilities; and/or
Assignment of Level 2 up to Level 5 for students from the Student Handbook
Other sanction(s) or remedies as deemed appropriate under the circumstances.

Possible Sanctions and Remedies for Employee Respondents:
Verbal or written warnings;
Final written warning;
Performance Improvement Plan
Educational training and/or counseling;
Deliver apology to those affect by the behavior/violation;
Activity or location restrictions;
Restitution or fines;
Loss of privileges or the addition of special conditions that need to be fulfilled;
Restorative Justice;
Employment probation;
Cancelation or modification of contract;
Job demotion or reassignment;
Suspension with or without pay for a specific period of time;
Dismissal or termination;
Ineligible for rehire; and/or
Other sanction(s) or remedies as deemed appropriate under the circumstances

Page 83

APPEALS AND ADDITIONAL PROCESSES PROVIDED TO STUDENTS AND
EMPLOYEES
Appeals
Either party may appeal in writing to the Hearing Officer(s)’s determination regarding a Respondent’s
responsibility under the Complaint Resolution Process or from the University’s dismissal of a Formal
Complaint (or any allegations in the Formal Complaint) within 10 days of notification of such a
determination, on the following bases:
A procedural irregularity that affected the outcome of the matter;

There is new evidence that was not reasonably available at the time of the determination regarding
responsibility or dismissal was made that could affect the outcome of the matter; or

The Title IX Coordinator, investigator(s), or Hearing Officer(s) had a conflict of interest or bias for or
against the parties (generally, or specifically in this matter) that affected the outcome of the matter.
The Appeals Hearing Officer must not be the same person as the Title IX Coordinator, investigator(s), or
Hearing Officer(s) in the Complaint Resolution Process. Both parties will be notified in writing when an
appeal is filed and the appeal procedures will apply equally for both parties.
Any non‐appealing party (or the University) will have 7 days from the notification of an appeal to submit a
written statement in support of the initial outcome. The decision‐maker on the appeal will release a
written decision within 21 days from the date of the appeal.
The Appeals Hearing Officer will release a written decision within 21 days from the date of the appeal to:
Affirm the Hearing Officer(s)’s determination regarding the Respondent’s responsibility and affirm the
disciplinary sanctions and remedies, if applicable;

Affirm the Hearing Officer(s)’s determination regarding the Respondent’s responsibility and amend the
disciplinary sanctions and remedies, if applicable;

Remand the process back to the hearing stage for the Hearing Officer(s) to remedy any procedural
irregularity or consider any new evidence;

Page 84

Reverse the Hearing Officer(s)’s determination of the Respondent’s responsibility and amend the
disciplinary sanctions and remedies, if applicable; or

Affirm or amend the sanctions and/or remedies outlined in the initial determination issued.

Complaint Resolution Process Documentation
The University (through the appropriate office) will retain all of the documentation included in the
Complaint Resolution Process for seven years, in accordance with state and federal records laws and
University policy. All documentation of records is private and confidential to the extent possible under
law. Student records of the Complaint Resolution Process are disciplinary records under FERPA.
Employee records of the Complaint Resolution Process are subject to the Freedom of Information Act
(“FOIA”), and included in the employee’s official employment record.

Complaint Resolution Process Timeframe
The entire Complaint Resolution Process will be completed in no more than 150 days from the filing of
the Formal Complaint. However, the circumstances may require a temporary delay in this timeframe and
the University may extend this timeframe for good cause. In such an instance, the University will provide
written notice to the parties of the delay or extension and the reason(s) for the action. Good cause may
include considerations such as the absence of a party, a party’s advisor, or a witness; concurrent law
enforcement activity; or the need for language assistance or accommodation of disabilities. The time
period in this section does not include the period the parties attempted but failed to reach an agreement
in the Informal Resolution Process, if applicable, and in such a case, the Complaint Resolution Process
timeframe will be extended by the period the parties attempted to reach an Informal Resolution.

EMERGENCY REMOVAL AND EMPLOYEE ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE
Emergency Removal
A Respondent may be removed from the University’s education program, employment or activity on an
emergency basis if, after an individualized safety and risk analysis, it is determined that such a removal is
justified because the Respondent poses an immediate threat to the physical health or safety of an
individual arising from the allegations of Sexual Misconduct. Under these circumstances, the Respondent
will be notified in writing of the emergency removal and the Respondent will have an opportunity to
immediately challenge the decision following the emergency removal.

Page 85

ADDITIONAL CONDUCT VIOLATIONS UNDER THIS POLICY
False Information and False Complaints
Avila prohibits individuals from knowingly making false reports of sexual misconduct (including sexual
assault and sexual harassment). Knowingly making false reports of sexual assault, dating/domestic
violence and/or stalking constitutes a violation of the Student Code of Conduct and the Faculty/Staff
Handbook and will result in disciplinary action. However, a report made in good faith is not considered
false merely because the evidence does not ultimately support the allegation.

Retaliation
The University will not tolerate retaliation of any form against any applicant, student, employee, or other
individual for reporting a violation of this policy or for assisting in the investigation of a complaint. Any
person who retaliates against (a) anyone filing a report of Sexual Misconduct or a Formal Complaint, (b)
the parties or any other participants (including any witnesses or any University employee) in a Complaint
Resolution Process relating to a Formal Complaint, (c) any person who refuses to participate in a
Complaint Resolution Process, or (d) any person who under this Policy opposed any unlawful practice, is
subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal or separation from the University. If any
participant in a Complaint Resolution Process believes they have been subject to Retaliation, they should
immediately report the alleged retaliatory conduct to the Title IX Coordinator.

Interference with the Complaint Resolution Process
Any person who interferes with the Complaint Resolution Process is subject to disciplinary action up to
and including dismissal or separation from the University. Interference with a Complaint Resolution
Process may include, but is not limited to:
Attempting to coerce, compel, or prevent an individual from providing testimony or relevant information;

Removing, destroying, or altering documentation relevant to the Complaint Resolution Process; or

Knowingly providing false or misleading information to the Title IX Coordinator, investigator or Hearing
Officer, or encouraging others to do so.

Page 86

Failure to Report for Institutional Official
Institutional Officials knowingly fail to report all information concerning an incident the employee
reasonably believes constitutes stalking, dating violence, sexual assault, or sexual harassment committed
by or against a student or employee at the time of the incident, the employee is subject to disciplinary
action, including termination.
For purposes of Failure to Report, the definition of sexual harassment, as defined under state law, is
broader than the definition of sexual harassment under this Policy and is defined as: Unwelcome, sex‐
based verbal or physical conduct that:
In the employment context, unreasonably interferes with a person’s work performance or creates an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; or
In the education context, is sufficiently severe, persistent, or pervasive that the conduct interferes with a
student’s ability to participate in or benefit from educational programs or activities at a postsecondary
institution.

DISCRETION IN APPLICATION
The University retains discretion to interpret and apply this policy in a manner that is not clearly
unreasonable, even if the University’s interpretation or application differs from the interpretation of the
parties.
Despite the University’s reasonable efforts to anticipate all eventualities in drafting this policy, it is
possible unanticipated or extraordinary circumstances may not be specifically or reasonably addressed by
the express policy language, in which case the University retains discretion to respond to the
unanticipated or extraordinary circumstance in a way that is not clearly unreasonable.
The provisions of this policy and the Hearing Procedures are not contractual in nature, whether in their
own right, or as part of any other express or implied contract. Accordingly, the University retains
discretion to revise this policy and the Hearing Procedures at any time, and for any reason. The University
may apply policy revisions to an active case provided that doing so is not clearly unreasonable.

Page 87

Addendum 2: Student Access
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION OF STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
1. Purpose
It is the policy of the University to provide reasonable accommodations to qualified students
with disabilities and to afford them an equal opportunity to participate in and enjoy the benefits
of University courses, programs, services, and activities.
This policy is in compliance with Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 as
amended; the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (P.L. 93-11) and 45 C.F.R. Part 84; Fair Housing Act of
1968 42 U.S.C. Sec. 3601 et seq.; and Missouri Title XII, Chapter 213.

2. Scope
This policy covers individuals enrolled in in any program of study, whether matriculated or
nonmatriculated.

3. Definitions
Disability: The presence of a sensory, mental, or physical impairment (whether temporary or
permanent) that:


Is medically cognizable or diagnosable, exists as a record or history, or is known or
shown through an interactive process to exist in fact; and



Has a substantially limiting effect upon the student's ability to perform and complete the
essential elements of the course, program, service, or activity.

Qualified Student: A student with a disability who continuously meets essential standards of
the relevant University course, program, service, or activity, with or without the benefit of
reasonable accommodations.
Instructional Personnel: Includes faculty, lecturers, teaching assistants, or other individuals
who are responsible for delivering the course, program, service, or activity.
Reasonable Accommodations: Implementing academic adjustments and/or auxiliary aids,
and/or modifying or adjusting practices, procedures, or policies so that a qualified student with
a disability receives equal access to a course, program, service, or activity. Reasonable
accommodations will be implemented as long as:

Page 88



They are medically necessary (i.e., there is competent medical evidence establishing a
relationship between the disability and the need for an accommodation); and



They do not impose an undue hardship on the University or result in a fundamental
alteration to the nature or operation of the institution, program, course, service, or
activity.

The University need not accept the student's requested accommodation if an alternative
reasonable accommodation is determined to be equally effective.
Health Care Professional: Health care professional means a person who is legally competent
to diagnose and/or treat the particular medical or mental health condition or conditions which
are the basis of the accommodation request.
Undue Hardship and Fundamental Alteration: Undue hardship means that implementing a
requested reasonable accommodation would be excessively costly, extensive, substantial, or
disruptive, or result in a fundamental alteration of the nature or operation of the institution,
program, service, activity, or course. In determining whether a requested reasonable
accommodation poses an undue hardship or fundamental alteration, the assessment may
include, but is not limited to, evaluating the impact on the overall resources, standards, or
structure of the course, program, service, and/or activity. Before concluding that a particular
accommodation would impose an undue hardship or a fundamental alteration, the Student
Access Office will consider alternative accommodations.

4. Accommodation Process
A. Request for Reasonable Accommodations
A student must make a request for reasonable accommodations to the Student Access Office.
In addition to traditional classroom activities, accommodations can be requested for, but are
not limited to: placement exams, on-campus housing, study abroad programs, University
events and activities, and clinical or internship placements.
Requests made directly to instructional personnel, even if implemented for a particular class,
are not considered a reasonable accommodation under this policy. Instead, the Student
Access Office will conduct an individualized assessment of the request, determine whether an
accommodation is necessary, and what reasonable accommodations are available.
Instructional personnel should refer a request for a reasonable accommodation to the Student
Access Office.
B. Medical Documentation
The Student Access Office may request that the student provide a verification and/or
clarification by their health care professional of the need for the requested accommodation
when the adjustments required to provide a reasonable accommodation or the
Page 89

reasonableness of a requested accommodation are not readily apparent. The request for
verification or clarification may ask for information about the diagnosis, nature, the extent of
functional limitations, impact, and duration of a disability. To authorize the University to seek
verification/clarification directly from the student's health care professional, the student will
be asked to complete and submit the necessary release.
At its own expense, the University may obtain a medical assessment or medical
documentation review from a health care professional of its own choice. Examples of the kind
of assessment or review the University may request include, but are not limited to:


Whether the student has a disability;



The medical necessity of requested accommodations;



Whether there may be equally effective alternative reasonable accommodations to
those requested; and



Whether the student can perform particular tasks, functions, or activities with or
without reasonable accommodations.

C. Interactive Process
The Student Access Office will engage in an interactive process with the student to review the
request(s), determine if accommodations are appropriate and necessary, and identify
effective reasonable accommodations that will provide the student equitable access to
University courses, programs, services, and activities. The student's continuous participation
in the interactive process is essential for it to be effective and not doing so may delay or end
the process.
Students are responsible for ongoing assessment of the effectiveness of their approved
accommodations. Students with questions or concerns about their accommodations should
contact the Student Access Office as soon as possible.
D. Approval of Reasonable Accommodations
Reasonable accommodations are not required to produce the identical result or level of
achievement for persons with and without disabilities, but must afford students with
disabilities an equal opportunity to obtain the same result, to gain the same benefit, or to
reach the same level of achievement that is provided to others.
Following any consultation that may be needed with instructional personnel involved in the
particular course, program, service, or activity, the Student Access Office makes the final
determination about reasonable accommodations the University will provide to the student.
When a reasonable accommodation request is approved by the Student Access Office, the
Page 90

student will be provided a digital confirmation of the approval and a process to notify
instructional personnel about implementation. This document will describe approved
reasonable accommodations, share information about implementation for instructional
personnel, and Student Access Office contact information to seek assistance as needed.
When reasonable accommodations are established, the Student Access Office documents their
approval and discusses with the student how the accommodations will need to be activated
for implementation on an individual course, program, service, or activity basis and/or term
basis. The student is responsible for notifying instructional personnel of activating approved
accommodations in a timely manner. The student can engage the Student Access Office, as
needed, to facilitate conversations with instructional personnel about implementing activated
accommodations.
Instructional personnel are responsible for implementing approved reasonable
accommodations in a timely manner. Approved accommodations may not be unilaterally
denied or modified. Any concerns about implementing approved accommodations should be
directed to the Student Access Office.

5. Disability Resources for Reconsideration
Students have the right to seek reconsideration upon a denial of a requested accommodation
after the interactive process has been completed. The student also has the right to engage with
any University or other grievance policies/resources at any point during the reconsideration
process.

6. Confidentiality
All documentation submitted to the Student Access Office is kept separate from academic
records and is considered a student record under the Family Education Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA). On a need to know basis, the Student Access Office may share information about an
accommodation request with other University employees to assess, manage, and implement the
approved accommodations. This may include information about the impacts of the medical or
mental health condition, the knowledge of which is necessary to evaluate and make
determinations about reasonable accommodations and the qualified status of the student.

7. Accountability for Conduct
Students may be held accountable for conduct that violates professional standards of their
academic program or the Student Conduct Code for Avila University, even if related to a
disability. Once on notice that a student's conduct may be related to a disability, the University
will engage in the interactive process to evaluate possible reasonable accommodations that will
assist the student in adhering to the conduct standards and requirements.

8. Health and Safety Risk to Others

Page 91

The University may decide not to permit a student to participate in or benefit from the courses,
services, programs, or activities of the University when that student poses a direct threat to the
health or safety of others. Evaluating whether a student's participation poses a direct threat is
based on an individualized assessment, and includes current medical knowledge and/or the best
available objective evidence about the nature, duration, and severity of the risk; the probability
that injury or harm will occur; and whether reasonable modifications of policies, practices,
procedures, or the provision of academic adjustments and/or auxiliary aids or services can
mitigate the risk.

9. Non-Retaliation
Requesting reasonable accommodations will not adversely affect a student's opportunity to
enjoy equal terms, benefits, privileges, or conditions of the University's programs, including
social or recreational activities. It is a violation of University policy to take adverse action
against a student based on a student's disability status and/or a student's request for
reasonable accommodations.

10. Other Types of Accommodations
A.

Employment
Requests for reasonable accommodations in employment are addressed by the Human
Resources Office at Avila University. This includes student employees, teaching
assistants, and research assistants. Although every effort is made to avoid duplicative
assessments, differing standards apply when assessing appropriate reasonable
accommodations in employment, so accommodations approved for academics may not
automatically translate to employment and vice versa.

B.

On-Campus Housing Accommodations
Students seeking accommodations in on-campus housing should contact the Student
Access Office.

C.

Service Animals
The Service and Emotional Support Animal policy describes University policy in regard to
access for service animals in buildings or structures the University owns, operates,
leases, rents, or controls. Students with service animals are encouraged but are not
obligated to contact the Student Access Office in order to facilitate and record the need
for and use of service animals.
Students who need a service animal, assistance animal, or emotional support animal in
their University housing must make a request through the Student Access Office.

Page 92

D.

Pregnancy
In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 and relevant federal
and state laws, the University will provide pregnant students with reasonable
accommodations, academic adjustments, and/or auxiliary aids necessary to facilitate
equitable access, as it would to other students who have temporary medical conditions.
Students seeking accommodations for pregnancy-related matters should contact the
Student Access Office.

11. University Director of Student Access
The University’s Director of Student Access is available to review individual concerns relating to
compliance and to provide compliance support for programs, departments, schools, and
colleges relating to discrimination based on disability and providing access and reasonable
accommodations for students with disabilities.

12. Grievance Process/Complaint Reporting
The Student Access Office is responsible for investigating complaints that a University employee
has engaged in discrimination, harassment, retaliation, or other adverse actions, including a
failure to accommodate a student under this policy.
Students who wish to file allegations of discrimination may also contact the following:


Page 93

United States Department of Education Office for Civil Rights (OCR)

